=head1 NAME

Current Problems and workarounds

=head1 AUTHOR

Various Perl6 Contributors

=head1 DESCRIPTION

It is not uncommon for us to do a release, and find some particular
system configuration somewhere is having difficulties.  This file is
intended as a place to accumulate information on symptoms and work
arounds for the current release.  It is mainly intended for developers,
rather than users.

=head1 PROBLEM: "cpan -i Task::Smoke" fails because Test-TAP-Model-0.06 install fails.

B<WORKAROUND:> Force it with "cpan -if Task::TAP::Model".


=head1 PROBLEM: Doesn't build under Debian; aborts with
	"Setup: error reading ./.setup-config"

B<WORKAROUND:> Install libghc6-network-dev


=head1 PROBLEM: make pugs fails at link time, with errors like
  "undefined reference to `PL_modglobal'".

B<NOTES:>
You may have a misconfigured perl installation, which is breaking perl5
embedding.  You can try building without perl5 embedding, or read on.

Perl5 embedding depends on finding C header files like perl.h, and a
matching perl library (libperl.so, .a, or .dll).  When you run "perl
Makefile.PL", perl provides -I and -L arguments telling which
directories to look in, and in what order.  You can see these
arguments by running "perl -MExtUtils::Embed -e ccopts -e ldopts".
The headers and library must come from the same version of perl that
you ran.

If, for example, a second version of perl has also been installed, and
a libperl.so from it is found earlier in ldopts than the correct one,
the headers and libperl will not match, and make pugs may fail with
"undefined reference" errors as described.  You can either (re)move
the inconsistent file(s), or set LD_LIBRARY_PATH to include the
correct library directory first (it generally ends in "CORE").

Hypothetically, more subtle problems might perhaps arise if headers
and library match each other, but not the perl which ran Makefile.PL
and its Config.  This is never been reported, and even the unsubtle
version is very uncommon.

There doesn't seem to be an easy way to detect this problem short of
the current "try to link and see if it works".

=head1 PROBLEM: perl Makefile.PL fails after "Preprocessing library zlib" 
	 with an error like "Cannot install zlib: 256"

B<SOLUTION:> Please make sure that your $PATH contains ghc (6.8.2+) binaries 
	  first, and then run 'perl Makefile.PL' again.
