=head1 NAME

Base - SMOP basic structures

=head1 REVISION

$Id$

=head1 SMOP__Object

In SMOP, every single value, including the interpreter and the native
types, for instance, must be binary-compatible with the SMOP__Object
struct. This idea came directly from how perl5 works, with the SV
struct.

But unlike p5, the SMOP__Object struct is absolutely minimalist, it
defines no flags, no introspection information, it defines only that
every SMOP__Object has a Responder Interface, which in terms of the
data structure, means:

  struct SMOP__Object {
    SMOP__ResponderInterface* RI;
    void* data;
  }

This means that you can't really do anything to the object itself, you
can only talk to its responder interface.

=head1 SMOP__ResponderInterface

The Responder Interface, which is also binary-compatible with
SMOP__Object implements the lowlevel part of the meta object protocol,
it's through the Responder Interface that you can perform any action
on the object.

At that level, there's only one operation that can be performed on an
object, which is to invoke an arbitrary method. It's important to
realize, however, that this method invocation happens at the same
level that any high-level language might call, this means that there's
no distinction between native operators and high-level operators, nor
between native values and high-level values.

That being said, follows the structure of a responder interface:

  struct SMOP__ResponderInterface {
    SMOP__ResponderInterface* RI;
    void* data;
    SMOP__Object* (*MESSAGE)  (SMOP__Object* interpreter,
                               SMOP__ResponderInterface* self,
                               SMOP__Object* identifier,
                               SMOP__Object* capture);
    SMOP__Object* (*REFERENCE)(SMOP__Object* interpreter,
                               SMOP__ResponderInterface* self,
                               SMOP__Object* object);
    SMOP__Object* (*RELEASE)  (SMOP__Object* interpreter,
                               SMOP__ResponderInterface* self,
                               SMOP__Object* object);
    char* id;
  }

=over

=item MESSAGE

This is the function that handles the method invocation for the
objects to which this responder interface is the responsible for. As
you might have realized, it receives objects as arguments and returns
an object. We should deal with each of interpreter, identifier and
capture later.

=item REFERENCE/RELEASE

At start, the choice for a reference counting garbage collector was
made just looking for simplicity, since it's considerably simpler to
implement (even if considerably harder to debug and maintain). But as
SMOP evolved and the interoperability with perl5 became such an
important target, the choice for a reference count gc became a
fundamental aspect on how SMOP and perl5 will work together.

One thing that might not be obvious here is that it's up to each
responder interface to implement its own garbage collector, meaning
that we can have several garbage collectors coexisting at the same
process, for instance, the SMOP default lowlevel and the perl5 garbage
collectors.

The other consequence of this choice is that you can have objects that
are not subject to garbage collection, and this can be achieved simply
by making REFERENCE and RELEASE noops.

The policy on the use of REFERENCE and RELEASE is going to be
described in another document.

=back

=head1 Macros

The SMOP base defines a few macros that should be used when
interacting with SMOP Objects. While in theory, the use of those
macros is optional, it's strongly advised that you stick with them, to
make transitions to newer versions easier.

=over

=item SMOP__Object__BASE

This macro defines the head of every SMOP Object, basically defining
the members documented in the section above.

=item SMOP__ResponderInterface__BASE

As the above macro, this defines the head of every SMOP Responder
Interface, with the members documented above.

=item SMOP_RI(value)

Returns the ResponderInterface of a SMOP Object, it's important to
realize that if a value has no RI defined, it is considered itself its
own responder interface, and should therefore comply to the Responder
Interface struct.

=item SMOP_DISPATCH(interpreter, responder, identifier, capture)

Invoke the method "identifier" in an object handled by "responder", in
the context of the given "interpreter" with the given "capture" (each
of those concepts should be expanded later).

=item SMOP_REFERENCE(interpreter, value) / SMOP_RELEASE(interpreter, value)

Increments/decrements the reference count of the given "value" in the
context of the given "interpreter". This macro returns the value
itself, so you can use the macro in the place of the value itself.

=back

=head1 IMPORTANT SPEC NOTICE

This document describe everything that you can assume on an arbitrary
object, which means that you can only introspect in more details by
either calling a method, or by checking if you know the responder
interface of the given object.

It is erroneous to assume a given internal structure beyond what is
described in this document.

=cut
