=head1 NAME

Interpreter - The SMOP interpreter instance and implementation

=head1 REVISION

$id$

=head1 Introduction

In order to support the amount of polymorphism that was part of the
initial design ideas of SMOP, we had to separate the interpreter in
two layers: the instance and the implementation.

The first layer, the instance, represents an abstract interpreter, in
the sense that it only holds the current continuation. It would be
sane to think of it as a thread of execution, but it doesn't implement
the stack by itself. The second layer, the implementation, represents
a continuation at a given moment, and is itself responsible for stack
handling.

As everything in SMOP, the interpreter instance and implementation are
also SMOP objects, and therefore, you need to use methods to perform
any action with them. This is an important bootstrap mechanism,
because, unlike perl5, we can have the interpreter itself available as
a high-level value, in which methods can be called.

=head1 API

It's important to realize that you are free to use whatever object as
an interpreter instance of implementation, as long as it implements
the proper API. SMOP provides a default instance and has already three
different implementations (and you can use the three at the same
time).

=head2 Interpreter Instance

The interpreter instance is the object passed as the first argument
intime).  the SMOP_DISPATCH, SMOP_RELEASE and SMOP_REFERENCE macros,
representing a specific execution thread. In theory, implementing
green threads in SMOP is just a matter of creating several instances
and managing the scheduling between them.

=over

=item continuation

This method returns the current continuation for that interpreter, it
is often used to store that continuation before making a goto.

=item goto($continuation)

Sets the given $contination as the current continuation of the
interpreter. This method should simply replace the current
continuation.

=item has_next, next, eval

This three methods are delegated to the current continuation, in order
to provide step-by-step execution semantics, 

=item loop

This is the actual runloop, but it's actually just

  while ($continuation.has_next) {
      $continuation.next;
      $continuation.eval;
  }

So it's completely up to the continuation to decide how to handle it.

=back

=head2 Interpreter Implementation

The interpreter implementation deals with the more concrete details of
how to actually run code, the hability to run different interpreter
implementations at the same thread of execution is named "Polymorphic
Eval" and it is the most important feature of SMOP in respect to
integrating to perl5.

=over

=item has_next

This method returns false if there's nothing else to execute in this
continuation.

=item next

This method advances one step to be executed, but doesn't yet execute
it.

=item eval

This method executes one step of the execution. While some
interpreters may decide to do more than one step at a time in the eval
call, it's important to understand that this is how a "green threads"
implementation would be preemptive.

=item back

This returns the continuation that is "in the back" of this
continuation. It's by calling "back" that SMOP will support the
"dynamic lookup" of Perl 6 for variables like $+foo.

=item set_back

This sets the back of a continuation, it is usually called by the code
that creates a new continuation before going to that continuation.

=item setr

This sets a value that was being expected in this continuation,
usually, a continuation that was openned to handle a method call is
going to call setr with the result of that method call.

=item lexical

This returns the current lexical scope of the continuation, it is the
key to make $+foo work.

=item catch

This should return a code object if, and only if, this continuation
has a failure handling code. The code object will be invoked to handle
the failure.

=item control

This should return a code object if, and only if, this continuation
has a control exceptions handling code. The code object will be
invoked to handle the control exception.

=back

=cut
