=head1 NAME

Web::Terminal -- Framework for interactive web terminal

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    # client:
    use Web::Terminal::Dispatcher;
    &Web::Terminal::Dispatcher::send(...);

    # server:
    use Web::Terminal::Server;
    &Web::Terminal::Server::run(...);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Web::Terminal is a framework to build web interfaces for interactive (and
non-interactive) command-line programs.
Because a web interface is inherently stateless, Web::Terminal has a
client/server architecture. The client interface (C<send> from Dispatcher.pm) is
typically called from a CGI script. The only state information to be
maintained between the web client and CGI script is the session id string.
The server (provided by Server.pm) runs totally separately from the HTTP server. 
Client/server communication is essentially handled by the Msg.pm module, 
with the message body serialized using YAML::Syck.
The server creates a new instance of a Session object for every new session
request. 
The Session object forks off a process for the terminal application
and uses IO::Pty to communicate with it. 
Net::Telnet is used to handle stream processing, errors etc.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Web::Terminal::Settings>,
L<Web::Terminal::Dispatcher>,
L<Web::Terminal::Server>,
L<Web::Terminal::Server::Session>,
L<Web::Terminal::Msg>

=head1 AUTHOR

Wim Vanderbauwhede <wim.vanderbauwhede@gmail.com>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2006. Wim Vanderbauwhede. All rights reserved.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the same terms as Perl itself.

See L<http://www.perl.com/perl/misc/Artistic.html>

=cut
