=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Muldis::DB::SeeAlso -
External resources that you really ought to look at

=head1 VERSION

This document is Muldis::DB::SeeAlso version 0.3.0.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document is a central location within the L<Muldis::DB> distribution
where any important recommendations of or links to external resources go.
This includes both resources that were helpful in making Muldis::DB, as
well as resources that are or could be related to Muldis::DB.

=head1 FORMAL SPECIFICATION

Please see the separately distributed L<Language::MuldisD> distribution,
which defines the B<Muldis D> language that Muldis DB implements and uses
as its primary API.  Likewise see also the L<Language::MuldisD::SeeAlso>
appendix document of the Muldis D spec for links to various things
comprising and related to I<The Third Manifesto>, which Muldis DB is a
formal implementation of by way of Muldis D.

=head1 LIST OF PUBLIC Muldis::DB ENGINES

I<This documentation is pending.>

L<Muldis::DB::Engine::Example>.

=head1 PROSPECTIVE Muldis::DB EXTENSIONS

These are some theoretical examples of other Perl modules or documentation
that could be created to work with Muldis::DB, but if so would most likely
be distributed independently from it.  The given package names are
examples, and the examples in question could have other names if
appropriate.

=over

=item C<Muldis::DB::Cookbook(|::\w+)>

Pod files with a potentially large collection of examples, tutorials, FAQs,
and so on that help people learn how to employ Muldis::DB for the things
they need to do.  In particular, there should be a lot of help given for
people migrating from other systems that use different paradigms than
Muldis::DB does, for example SQL-using systems.

The Cookbook distro may also be the main repository of executing code that
would otherwise go in the /examples directory of the Muldis::DB core
distro.

=item C<Genezzo> or C<Genezzo::Muldis::DB> or
C<Muldis::DB::Engine::Genezzo> etc

A Muldis::DB Engine built around Jeffrey Cohen's Genezzo DBMS, or
specifically the class that does C<Muldis::DB::Engine::Role>, could
conceivably have either of the above file or package names, depending on
what its author prefers, or something else yet.  A strong name influence
could be whether Muldis::DB forms the sole public interface for Genezzo
after its conversion to use it, or whether Genezzo would retain alternate
public APIs that work without Muldis::DB being present on the system.  If
Muldis::DB is Genezzo's sole or primary interface, then simply C<Genezzo>
is probably best for branding.

=item C<Muldis::DB::Literal::Refactor(|::\w+)>

Utility modules that take Muldis::DB AST node objects as input and derive
other nodes as output, such as with the purpose of refactoring them into
canonical representations (such that users can then perform node value
equality tests for potentially any type of node), or forms that are more
efficient for particular uses but are still logically equivalent.

Presumably all of these would work using static analysis methods and not
actually "execute" anything, so they are independent of any particular
Engine environment.  This isn't to say that we can't separately have
modules that help implement a specific Engine and do AST optimization that
knows the specific needs of that Engine's implementation environment.

Other words that could go in such module names are like C<Optimize> or
C<Canon>, or whatever authors prefer.

=item C<Muldis::DB::Literal::YAML> and C<Muldis::DB::Literal::XML> etc

Utility modules that serialize Muldis::DB AST nodes to, or unserialize them
from, logically equivalent YAML, XML, or other generic data interchange
formats.  This implementation should be native to the Muldis D language
itself and not output any Perl-specific details that aren't in non-Perl
languages, so that it is suitable for interchange, at the very least
between Perl 5 and Perl 6.

=item C<Muldis::DB::Shell>

Implementation of a command-line user application over the Muldis::DB API
that takes string-form Muldis D as input, compiles it and runs it, and
nicely formats output for user display.  This is analogous to
L<DBI::Shell>.

=item C<DBD::Muldis::DB>

A wrapper over the Muldis::DB API that makes it work as a L<DBI> driver
module, should that be useful.  Depending on what DBI itself permits or
requires, this could take a variety of query definition formats, including
either or both of AST form or string form (most likely) Muldis D.

=item C<Muldis::DB::Literal::Translate::TutorialD> etc

Utility module that parses the B<Tutorial D> language into Muldis::DB AST
nodes, and also that generates the former from the latter.  Mainly this is
just by-the-book using the grammar published by Darwen and Date, but it
could also handle compatible extensions by other B<D> language
implementations.  In addition, separate utility modules can be made which
translate to and from other B<D> languages that don't look like B<Tutorial
D>.

=item C<Muldis::DB::Literal::Translate::SQL::Native>

Utility module that parses a Muldis::DB-native variant of SQL into
Muldis::DB AST nodes, and also that generates the former from the latter.
This SQL variant is essentially a cleaned up subset of the SQL:2003
standard, with some misfeatures removed, some missing features added, and
some alterations common in other SQL DBMSs substituted or added.  Or
alternately, it is like a subset of Muldis D made to look as much like SQL
as possible.  This Muldis::DB-native SQL variant always has distinct column
names in rowsets, requires matching column names for inputs to
union/intersect/etc, never stores or results in duplicate rows, always uses
2-valued logic (not (>=3)-valued logic), and has case-sensitive
table/column/etc names and character strings.  An application written to
use this SQL dialect rather than some other dialect should behave more
deterministically, and perform faster, than ones written to some other SQL
dialect, since there is less indirection involved between what users query
and what actually happens to implement it.

=item C<Muldis::DB::Literal::Translate::SQL::\w+>

Utility modules that parse other variants of SQL (or subsets thereof) into
Muldis::DB AST nodes, and also that generate the former from the latter.
Examples of these variants are the actual SQL:2003 standard, and the native
dialects of each actual SQL DBMS.

=item C<Muldis::DB::Literal::Translate::\w+>

Utility modules that translate data (including code and declaratives)
between representations that are Muldis::DB AST nodes and representations
that aren't, or between 2 of the latter kind while using the former kind as
an intermediate representation.  Besides the aforementioned possibilities
that deal with B<D> languages or SQL, we can have utilities that translate
to/from native Perl data structures, including native Perl routine
definitions (L<PPI> would probably be employed in the Perl 5 version), and
including commonly used third party class' objects.

=item C<Muldis::DB::Proxy::(Server|Client|\w+)>

Implementation(s) of a generic proxy server plus client for the Muldis::DB
API, letting the normal Muldis::DB Engine and the user application reside
in separate processes.  The client module would do
C<Muldis::DB::Engine::Role> and the server would be an application or
server-extending plugin that sits on top of the Muldis::DB API.  Or
whatever implementers want to do.  This is analogous to proxying modules
for DBI or other DBMSs.

=item C<Muldis::DB::Engine::(SQLite|Postgres|Oracle|\w+)>

A default (but not mandatory) namespace for Muldis::DB Engines to go, that
do C<Muldis::DB::Engine::Role(|::\w+)>.  A lot of these would likely be
implemented over existing DBMSs, which results in Muldis::DB being an
alternative API for them.

=item C<DBIx::Class::Storage::Muldis::DB> etc

An alternative plug-in storage engine for DBIx::Class that uses Muldis::DB
rather than DBI.  Analogous extensions can be added to other DBI wrappers
modules such as Tangram or Rose::DB or what have you.  In either case, said
alternatives can either be bundled with the core distros of those other
modules, or separately from them, as per their authors' preferences.

=item C<Muldis::DB::Emulator::(DBI|JDBC|OCI|\w+)>

Emulations of other modules or APIs as wrappers over Muldis::DB.  This is
potentially the easiest way, short of the other modules themselves being
appropriately updated, to permit migration for legacy apps to Muldis::DB
while they have the fewest actual code changes.  The emulators would likely
employ SQL translator utilities internally.

=item C<Muldis::DBx::\w+>

Unofficial extensions to Muldis::DB could be named in this space, though it
doesn't have to be used if prior coordination happens between developers.

=back

=head1 PUBLIC SOLUTIONS BUILT OVER Muldis::DB

I<This documentation is pending.>

These Perl 5 applications and frameworks are, perhaps, at the front of the
line to get Muldis::DB bindings: L<Jifty>, L<Catalyst>, L<Maypole>,
L<Bricolage>, L<RT>.  Generally speaking, the more active the development
or the more popular the project, the higher the priority to support it.

=head1 DBMS-RELATED PERL MODULES

I<This documentation is pending.>

These other Perl 6 packages also work in the problem domain of managing
data or data definitions or connections to databases:

L<Set::Relation>, L<Set>.

These other Perl 5 packages also work in the problem domain of managing
data or data definitions or connections to databases (list not exhaustive):

L<DBI>, L<Tangram>, L<DBIx::Class>, L<HDB>, L<Class::DBI>, L<Pixie>,
L<Alzabo>, L<DBIx::SQLEngine>, L<Rose::DB>, L<SPOPS>, L<Set::Object>,
L<Set::Scalar>, L<Object::Relation>, L<Oryx>, L<DBM::Deep>,
L<DBIx::SearchBuilder>, L<DBIx::RecordSet>, L<DBIx::Abstract>,
L<DBIx::AnyDBD>, L<DBIx::Browse>, L<DBIx::DBH>, L<MKDoc::SQL>,
L<Data::Transactional>, L<DBIx::ModelUpdate>, L<DBIx::ProcedureCall>,
L<DB::Ent>, L<DBIx::Romani>, L<DBIx::DBSchema>, L<DBIx::Namespace>,
L<TripleStore>, L<Data::Table>, L<ORM>, L<OOPS>, L<Object::Transaction>,
L<Relations>, L<DBIx::SimplePerl>, L<DBIx::YAWM>, L<Class::Entity>,
L<SQL::Statement>, L<SQL::Parser>, L<SQL::Translator>, L<SQL::YASP>,
L<SQL::Generator>, L<SQL::Schema>, L<SQL::Abstract>, L<SQL::Snippet>,
L<SQL::Catalog>, L<DBIx::Perlish>, L<Tao::DBI>, L<NTuples>,
L<DBIx::CopyRecord>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Darren Duncan (C<perl@DarrenDuncan.net>)

=head1 LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

This file is part of the Muldis::DB framework.

Muldis::DB is Copyright © 2002-2007, Darren Duncan.

See the LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT of L<Muldis::DB> for details.

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS in L<Muldis::DB> apply to this file too.

=cut
