

<fglock> I guess I can build a 'closure' object that knows how to dump itself
<fglock> but there is still the problem of dumping use'd CPAN modules
<fglock> I don't think that's possible without 5-on-6
<fglock> one possible solution is, perl5 modules are loaded twice - at compile and runtime
<TimToady> assuming you can be sure of getting the same one...
<TimToady> or at least one that has the same interface
<TimToady> Ada was always big on separating the interface from the implementation so you could swap out the implementation without changing the interface
<TimToady> the reload trick should work find for Perl 6, because we guarantee that the user can't modify the used.
<TimToady> and we also guarantee that modules installed in the library have version numbers
<TimToady> so in an a.b.c the b theoretically guarantees a unique interface.
<TimToady> and you already presumably know how to save your own closures, or you wouldn't a compiler...

# - kp6 needs a way to export subs to the runtime

use Data::Dump::Streamer;
use strict;

sub X { print "ok" }

print Dump( \&X );

__END__

xxxx - Possible BEGIN workflow:

# there is no subs in a namespace - everything is either our or my
our $main::var;  # in declaration order
    package Main;
    my $y;  
    my $z; 
    our $_SUB_begin_001_ = sub {
        my $x;  
        $y = sub { $x };   
        $z = sub { $x } 
    }
    INIT { $Main::_SUB_begin_001_->() }


#---

use Data::Dump::Streamer;
use strict;

my $x;  BEGIN { $x = 4 };

#   turns into 

my $__CEV_x1 = \do { my $x };  
INIT {
        $$__CEV_x1 = 4;
  print Dump $__CEV_x1;
}
  print Dump $__CEV_x1;

#---

BEGIN { 
        use X @list;
}

#  turns into 

BEGIN { 
        require X;
        # no X calls 'unimport' instead of 'import'
        X.import( @list ) if UNIVERSAL::can('X', 'import');
}

# from perldoc -f require
    sub require {
        my ($filename) = @_;
        if (exists $INC{$filename}) {
                return 1 if $INC{$filename};
                die "Compilation failed in require";
        }
        my ($realfilename,$result);
        ITER: {
                foreach $prefix (@INC) {
                $realfilename = "$prefix/$filename";
                if (-f $realfilename) {
                        $INC{$filename} = $realfilename;
                        $result = do $realfilename;
                        last ITER;
                }
                }
                die "Can't find $filename in \@INC";
        }
        if ($@) {
                $INC{$filename} = undef;
                die $@;
        } elsif (!$result) {
                delete $INC{$filename};
                die "$filename did not return true value";
        } else {
                return $result;
        }
    }

#---

my $__CEV_x1 = \do { my $x }; 
INIT { say $$__CEV_x1;  LEAVE { undefine $__CEV_x1 } }

#---

my $y;  my $z; BEGIN { my $x;  $y = { $x };   $z = { $x } }

__END__

- BEGIN blocks are executed at parse time

    token BEGIN { BEGIN <block> { execute_begin; return ... } }
  
- CEV = "compile-time existing variables" (luqui++)

- This is one case when BEGIN has a variable which doesn't exist at compile-time:
  
    for 1,2 { 
        my $x = sub { 
                my $y;  
                BEGIN { $y = 42 }; 
                say $y 
        };  
        $x() 
    }

<luqui> so, how about this: it is illegal to assign to non-existant varaibles at compile-time
<luqui> we just need to define 'exists' appropriately
<luqui> a variable exists if... it is in a closure that cannot be cloned?
<luqui> that is, if $x can only ever refer to one thing, then it exists at compile-time
<luqui> I like that...
<luqui> so crap like this:   for 1,2 { my $x;  BEGIN { $x = 10 };  say $x }
<luqui> is illegal
<luqui> but:  { my $x;  BEGIN { $x = 10 };  sub foo() { $x } }
<luqui> is not
<luqui> (assuming that closure was in void context...)
<luqui> then, in the pad structure, you can store existent variables and reasonably initialize them at the beginning of runtime
<luqui> inside their scope...

<fglock> it could work like this - each 'my' decl creates a new pad, at compile-time
<fglock> and BEGIN blocks are moved to the start of the pad code
<luqui> where by "moved to " you mean "executed and then the pad's environment is dumped at" ?

<luqui> my $y;  for 1..rand(10) { my $x = $_;  BEGIN { $y = { $x } } }  $y()
<luqui> now what?
<luqui> I assume it will be 1 if the body ever gets executed
<luqui> and undef otherwise

<luqui> so to clarify, $y() can return undef, but regardless $y is a code object, and has to refer to something

<TimToady> whether we can get the "first time through" uses compiler's pad thing to work is the real issue, I expect

<TimToady> I agree with luqui on the general principle--a BEGIN can only influence structures that exist at compile time by side effect.  Other than that, all it can do is return a value.
<TimToady> the "extra" question is whether there are extraordinary structures we can have at compile time that do things at run time
<TimToady> and I think the answer is, don't sweat it for now.

<luqui> right.  I think you can generate code to initialize all "compile-time existing" variables at the beginning of their scopes, and the semantics will be correct
<luqui> (though it is indeed a bit tricky if they refer to each other)

<luqui> my $x;   INIT { $x = 1 }  BEGIN { $x = 2 };   say $x;
<luqui> or even:
<fglock> that's a problem
<luqui> n/m
<luqui> oh dear
<luqui> I was going to say that you have to move side-effects to the beginning of the scope where the affected variables were
<luqui> however:
*** koye [i=milan@195.252.85.84] has joined #perl6
<luqui> my $x;   ...stuff { my $y;  BEGIN { $x = { $y };  $y = { $x } } ...stuff }
<luqui> ahh, pathological examples, my favorite
<luqui> it is impossible to initialize $x at the beginning of its scope
<luqui> ok... so, BEGIN blocks can only work on "compile-time existing variables"  (this assumption is getting more and more useful)
<luqui> so you don't scope them
<luqui> they are all global
<luqui> then you can rig them to refer to each other
<luqui> but of course, that has GC problems...
<fglock> I'm compiling to "desugared p6", which compiles either to p5 or parrot
*** theorbtwo [n=theorb@dyn-62-56-59-40.dslaccess.co.uk] has joined #perl6
<[particle]> you'll need weak references

<luqui> hmm, so we need something where the creation of an object can claim a reference instead of creating it
<luqui> this is not a standard language feature :-(
<luqui> let's see here (brainstorming commencing)
<luqui> all compile-time existing variables (CEVs) are globals with an extra level of indirection
<fglock> what's a non-CEV example?
*** hexmode [n=mah@pool-162-83-250-134.ny5030.east.verizon.net] has quit [Read error: 54 (Connection reset by peer)]
<luqui> so:  "my $x;  BEGIN { $x = 4 };"   turns into "my $__CEV_x1 = \do { my $x };  $$__CEV_x1 = 4;"
<luqui> non-CEVs are things like $x in for 1..3 { my $x }
<fglock> k
<luqui> then you undef the reference at the end of its scope
<luqui> so:  "{ my $x;   say $x }"  turns into "my $__CEV_x1 ... ...;  { say $$__CEV_x1;  LEAVE { undefine $__CEV_x1 } }
<luqui> the initialization of all CEVs happens first thing in the the program
<luqui> before any other INIT blocks
<luqui> I think that actually does solve the circular-dependency pathology
<luqui> and the GC problem
<luqui> it's just... ugly

<luqui> my $y;  my $z; BEGIN { my $x;  $y = { $x };   $z = { $x } }
<luqui> $x is not CEV, but you have to express that the variable that $y and $z are referencing are the same one


---

<fglock> is a BEGIN block compiled, and then executed - or is it compiled/executed a statement at a time
<TimToady> BEGIN just compiles like a normal closure, but executes after final }
<fglock> it can have a BEGIN inside it, right?
<TimToady> yes
<TimToady> but you don't need statement granulatity on you compiler pipeline
<TimToady> closure granularity is good enough

<masak> what about a BEGIN with an END in it?
<TimToady> the END doesn't care
<TimToady> still executes when the run-time is exiting
<TimToady> all END/CHECK/INIT do are push a closure on a queue
<TimToady> perhaps just push everything and let the caller decide pop vs shift.
<TimToady> then the list always reflects lexical order, for which there is something to be said.
<TimToady> especially if people add new blocks with weird execution orders, like dependencies that have to be calculated at run time.


---

about 'use'

<fglock> requiring a disassembler is not a reasonable requirement for 6-on-6
<fglock> I'll try to find other solutions
<TimToady> for your own closures, surely you have the original AST
<TimToady> or at least "had" at some time in the past...
<fglock> yes - I'm working on that direction...
<TimToady> and anything imported just has to have a "true name" that you can relink to at run time.
*** GabrielVieira [i=mad@201.79.177.80] has quit [Read error: 110 (Connection timed out)]
<fglock> I wonder if it would be useful to have the program dump'able at any time - as a side effect of having enough info available
<TimToady> in fact, "is export" basically just makes a link to a name in a subpackage...
<TimToady> the Smalltalkers would like that...
<TimToady> but I'm not sure it's practical on every VM
<fglock> basically, you have the source file, global variables, and the pads - only the stack is missing
<fglock> but cps can take care of that
<fglock> could
<TimToady> you can't remember foreign stacks in any case, if you've called out to some other runtime that doesn't integrate with your cps
<TimToady> which is why cps systems tend to shun outside "help", I suspect.
<fglock> ah
<TimToady> we could start a marketing campaign for "100% Pure Perl" I suppose, but it seems a bit unperlish...
<TimToady> I suppose if you can replay all the API events to a non-cps system you can fake a continuation.
<TimToady> ignoring side effects.
<TimToady> and assuming you could restart the API in a consistent state.
<TimToady> well, not today's problem.
<fglock> sure :)
<TimToady> anyway, assuming all imports are done with true names, a re-use at runtime only has to do a require, not an import.
*** penk [n=ubuntu@218-162-96-76.dynamic.hinet.net] has joined #perl6
<TimToady> course, the whole point of pragmas is to cheat...
<TimToady> but maybe we can help them "cheat fair"
*** spx2 [n=chatzill@89.37.70.170] has quit [Read error: 131 (Connection reset by peer)]
<fglock> the 'use' implementation probably needs to install hooks to do the right thing at INIT
<TimToady> and I'm saying that hopefully the right thing is just a require
<TimToady> require just says "make sure the package aka (true names) are populated"
<TimToady> normal importation should have mapped all aliases to package symbols that require will bring in
<TimToady> so nothing needs to be realiased at run time.
<fglock> you mean, the generated code is something like this?  require X; *s = \&X::s;
<TimToady> that implies to me that "use Foo" resolves to "use Foo-1.2.3-JRANDOM" at compile time
<TimToady> well, P6 does lexical imports by default, not typeglobs
<fglock> what does it desugars to? require Foo-1.2.3-JRANDOM; s := X::s
<fglock> how do you import a sub?
<TimToady> I'm saying that if you have something aliased to X::s at compile time, the dump of that structure should preserve the alias without having to regenerate it a run time.
<fglock> I mean, what does the dump would look like?
<TimToady> how do you dump lexicals currently with their latest compile-time value?
<fglock> I call a subroutine that is defined inside the lexical scope
<fglock> an 'inspector' sub
<TimToady> so if you've got "my $importsub = \&X::s" there...
<TimToady> it just needs to find a way at run time to remap $importsub back to the "X::s" true name
<TimToady> aka symbolic reference
<TimToady> so basically linking is turning symbolic refs back into hard ones, I guess.
<fglock> what is the p6 syntax for this? "my $importsub = \&X::s"
<TimToady> phone &
<kolibrie> pesky phones
<TimToady> my &importsub := &X::s;
<fglock> hmm - when to use ::= ?
<TimToady> we might have to limit the exportation of anonymous subs though, I suppose.
<TimToady> or assign them an obfuscated true name for linking purposes.
<TimToady> for now we can just make "sub is export {...}" illegal
*** renormalist [n=ss5@renormalist.net] has joined #perl6
<TimToady> and if there's a custom import sub, it can handle its own semantics presumably...
<fglock> I guess I need to start implementation - I'd like to have something runnable to experiment with
<TimToady> including, presumably handing the user a thunk to poke into the INIT queue.
<TimToady> for now assume you don't have to save anything anonymous across a use boundary.
<TimToady> that's the main point of package namespaces, after all--to hold the public interface
<luqui> why can't you use Data::Dump::Streamer as a catch-most method?
*** elmex [n=elmex@pD9E9FE6B.dip.t-dialin.net] has joined #perl6
<fglock> luqui: one reason is that it renames variables
<luqui> hmp
<fglock> another reason is to avoid cheating - this is 6-on-6, and it doesn't have a disassembler
<luqui> ahh
<luqui> okay, that makes sense
<fglock> v6.pm does use DDS

---

compilation x parsing

- These things must be emitted and created (eval'ed) right after they are parsed:
    sub, variable, method declaration
    no assignment, no binding
    note that signatures can also declare variables:
        sub x ( &todo ) { ... }
        for @a -> $x { ... } 
- what kind of things should not be executed?
    - no restrictions
- need a global 'current compiler pad'
    - how to make it lexical?
    - maybe use $?GRAMMAR to store it, or COMPILING::<$?PAD>
    