=head1 NAME

"Perl 5 to 6" Lesson 18 - Scoping

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  for 1 .. 10 -> $a {
      # $a visible here
  }
  # $a not visible here

  while my $b = get_stuff() {
      # $b visible here
  }
  # $b still visible here

  my $c = 5;
  {
      my $c = $c;
      # $c is undef here
  }
  # $c is 5 here

  my $y;
  my $x = $y + 2 while $y = calc();
  # $x still visible

=head1 DESCRIPTION

=head2 Lexical Scoping

Scoping in Perl 6 is quite similar to that of Perl 5. A Block introduces a
new lexical scope. A variable name is searched in the innermost lexical scope
first, if it's not found it is then searched for in the next outer scope and
so on. Just like in Perl 5 a C<my> variable is a proper lexical variable, and
an C<our> declaration introduces a lexical alias for a package variable.

But there are subtle differences: variables are exactly visible in the rest
of the block where they are declared, variables declared in block headers (for
example in the condition of a C<while> loop) are not limited to the block
afterwards. 

If you want to limit the scope, you can use formal parameters to the block:

  if calc() -> $result {
      # you can use $result here
  }
  # $result not visible here

Variables are visible immediately after they are declared, not at the end of
the statement as in Perl 5.

  my $x = .... ;
          ^^^^^
          $x visible here in Perl 6
              but not in Perl 5

=head2 Dynamic scoping

The C<local> adjective is now called C<temp>, and if it's not followed by an
initialization the previous value of that variable is used (not C<undef>).

There's also a new kind of dynamically scoped variable called a
I<hypothetical> variable. If the block is left with an exception, then the
previous value of the variable is restored. If not, it is kept.

=head2 Context variables

Some variables that are global in Perl 5 (C<$!>, C<$_>) are I<context>
variables in Perl 6, that is they are passed between dynamic scopes.

This solves an old Problem in Perl 5. In Perl 5 an C<DESTROY> sub can be
called at a block exit, and accidentially change the value of a global
variable, for example one of the error variables:

  # Broken Perl 5 code here:
  sub DESTROY { eval { 1 }; }

  eval {
      my $x = bless {};
      die "Death\n";
  };
  print $@ if $@;         # No output here

In Perl 6 this problem is avoided by not implicitly using global variables.

=head2 Pseudo-packages

If a variable is hidden by another lexical variable of the same name, it can
be accessed with the C<OUTER> pseudo package

    my $x = 3;
    {
        my $x = 10;
        say $x;             # 10
        say $OUTER::x;      # 3
        say OUTER::<$x>     # 3
    }

Likewise a function can access variables from its caller with the C<CALLER>
and C<CONTEXT> pseudo packages. The difference is that C<CALLER> only accesses
the scope of the immediate caller, C<CONTEXT> works like UNIX environment
variables (and should only be used internally by the compiler for handling
C<$_>, C<$!> and the like). To access variables from the outer dynamic
scope they must be declared with C<is context>.

=head1 MOTIVATION

It is now common knowledge that global variables are really bad, and cause
lots of problems. We also have the resources to implement better scoping
mechanism. Therefor global variables are only used for inherently global data
(like C<%*ENV> or C<$*PID>).

The block scoping rules haven been greatly simplified.

Here's a quote from Perl 5's C<perlsyn> document; we don't want similar things
in Perl 6:

 NOTE: The behaviour of a "my" statement modified with a statement
 modifier conditional or loop construct (e.g. "my $x if ...") is
 undefined.  The value of the "my" variable may be "undef", any
 previously assigned value, or possibly anything else.  Don’t rely on
 it.  Future versions of perl might do something different from the
 version of perl you try it out on.  Here be dragons.


=head1 SEE ALSO

S04 discusses block scoping: L<http://perlcabal.org/syn/S04.html>.

S02 lists all pseudo packages and explains context scoping:
L<http://perlcabal.org/syn/S02.html#Names>.
