=head1 NAME

"Perl 5 to 6" Lesson 20 - A grammar for (pseudo) XML

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    grammar XML {
        token TOP   { ^ <xml> $ };
        token xml   { <plain> [ <tag> <plain> ]* };
        token plain {  <-[<>&]>* };
        rule tag   {
            '<'(\w+) <attributes>*
            [
                | '/>'                 # a single tag
                | '>'<xml>'</' $0 '>'  # an opening and a closing tag
            ]
        };
        token attributes { \w+ '="' <-["<>]>* '"' };
    };

=head1 DESCRIPTION

So far the focus of these articles has been the Perl 6 language, independently
of what has been implemented so far. To show you that it's not a purely
fantasy language, and to demonstrate the power of grammars, this lesson shows
you the development of a grammar that parses basic XML, and that runs with
rakudo todo. I used revision 30633 for this, so in order to reproduce it
reliably, you should check out the same revision.

On a Unix like OS, this might look like this:

    svn co -r 30633 https://svn.perl.org/parrot/trunk parrot
    cd parrot
    perl Configure.pl && make
    cd languages/perl6/ && make perl6

Windows users have to build C<perl6.exe> in the last step instead.

Now run C<make spectest_regression>, and if you get any failures, please
send a mail to C<rakudobug@perl.org>.

=head2 Our idea of XML

For our purposes XML is quite simple: it consists of plain text and nested
tags that can optionally have attributes. So here are few tests for what we
want to parse as valid "XML", and what not:

    my @tests = (
        [1, 'abc'                       ],      # 1
        [1, '<a></a>'                   ],      # 2
        [1, '..<ab>foo</ab>dd'          ],      # 3
        [1, '<a><b>c</b></a>'           ],      # 4
        [1, '<a href="foo"><b>c</b></a>'],      # 5
        [1, '<a empty="" ><b>c</b></a>' ],      # 6
        [1, '<a><b>c</b><c></c></a>'    ],      # 7
        [0, '<'                         ],      # 8
        [0, '<a>b</b>'                  ],      # 9
        [0, '<a>b</a'                   ],      # 10
        [0, '<a>b</a href="">'          ],      # 11
        [1, '<a/>'                      ],      # 12
        [1, '<a />'                     ],      # 13
    );

    my $count = 1;
    for @tests -> $t {
        my $s = $t[1];
        my $M := $s ~~ XML::TOP;
        if !($M  xor $t[0]) {
            say "ok $count - '$s'";
        } else {
            say "not ok $count - '$s'";
        }
        $count++;
    }

This is a list of both "good" and "bad" XML, and a small test script that runs
these tests by matching against C<XML::TOP>. By convention the rule that
matches what the grammar should match is named C<TOP>.

(As you can see from test 1 we don't require a single root tag, but it would
be trivial to add this restriction).

=head2 Developing the grammar

The examples can be downloaded from
L<http://perlgeek.de/static/xml-grammar-01.tar.gz>

The essential of XML is surely the nesting of tags, so we'll focus on the
second test first. Place this at the top of the test script:

    grammar XML {
        token TOP   { ^ <tag> $ };
        token tag   {
            '<' (\w+) '>'
            '</' $0   '>'
        };
    };

(All tokens end with a C<;>. This is not required in Perl 6, but a limitation
of Rakudo).

Now run the script:

    $ ./perl6 xml-01.pl
    not ok 1 - 'abc'
    ok 2 - '<a></a>'
    not ok 3 - '..<ab>foo</ab>dd'
    not ok 4 - '<a><b>c</b></a>'
    not ok 5 - '<a href="foo"><b>c</b></a>'
    not ok 6 - '<a empty="" ><b>c</b></a>'
    not ok 7 - '<a><b>c</b><c></c></a>'
    ok 8 - '<'
    ok 9 - '<a>b</b>'
    ok 10 - '<a>b</a'
    ok 11 - '<a>b</a href="">'
    not ok 12 - '<a/>'
    not ok 13 - '<a />'

So this simple rule parses one pair of start tag and end tag, and correctly
rejects all four examples of invalid xml.

The first test should be easy to pass as well, so let's try this:

   grammar XML {
       token TOP   { ^ <xml> $ };
       token xml   { <text> | <tag> };
       token text  { <-[<>&]>*  };
       token tag   {
           '<' (\w+) '>'
           '</' $0   '>'
       }
    };

(Remember, C<< <-[...]> >> is a negated character class.)
 
And run it:
    
    $ ./perl6 xml-02.pl
    Null PMC access in type()
    current instr.: 'parrot;XML;xml' pc 975 (EVAL_17:282)
    called from Sub 'parrot;XML;TOP' pc 778 (EVAL_17:202)
    called from Sub 'parrot;Code;ACCEPTS' pc 5559 (src/gen_builtins.pir:3700)
    called from Sub '_block87' pc 1621 (EVAL_17:535)
    ...

Bad surprise, it dies. Let's try to find out where and why.

The stack trace shows that it was in an anonymous block, which doesn't really
help, because we don't know which. C<Code;ACCEPTS> points us to the regex
match: the smartmatch C<~~> internally calls C<ACCEPTS>, and regexes are
compiled down to Code object. It calls C<XML::TOP>, then C<XML::xml>, and then
dies. Since we haven't changed the C<tag> token, it must be C<text> that's
causing the problem.

Playing around a bit, asking on C<#perl6> on C<irc.freenode.org> or digging
through the bug tracker reveals that, due to some weird limitation, you can't
call a regex C<text> in Rakudo. So changing the name from C<text> to C<plain>
makes it work again, with this result:

    $ ./perl6 xml-03.pl
    ok 1 - 'abc'
    not ok 2 - '<a></a>'
    (rest unchanged)

Why in the seven hells did the second test stop working? The answer is that
Rakudo doesn't do longest token matching yet, but matches sequentially.
C<< <plain> >> matches the empty string (and thus always), so
C<< <plain> | <tag> >> never even tries to match C<< <tag> >>.

But we don't just want to match either plain text or a tag anyway, but random
combinations of both of them:

    token xml   { <plain> [ <tag> <plain> ]*  };

(C<[...]> are non-capturing groups, like C<(?: ... )> is in Perl 5).

And low and behold, the first two tests pass both.

The third test, C<< .<ab>foo</ab>dd >>, has text between opening and closing
tag, so we have to allow that next. But not only text is allowed between tags,
but arbitrary xml, so let's just call C<< <xml> >> there:

    token tag   {
        '<' (\w+) '>'
        <xml>
        '</' $0   '>'
    }

    ./perl6 xml-05.pl
    ok 1 - 'abc'
    ok 2 - '<a></a>'
    ok 3 - '..<ab>foo</ab>dd'
    ok 4 - '<a><b>c</b></a>'
    not ok 5 - '<a href="foo"><b>c</b></a>'
    (rest unchanged)

We can now focus attributes (the C<href="foo"> stuff):

    token tag   {
        '<' (\w+) <attribute>* '>'
        <xml>
        '</' $0   '>'
    };
    token attribute {
        \w+ '="' <-["<>]>* \"
    };

But this doesn't make any new tests pass. The reason is the blank between the
tag name and the attribute. Instead of adding C<\s+> or C<\s*> in many places
we'll switch from C<token> to C<rule>, which implies the C<:sigspace>
modifier:

    rule tag   {
        '<'(\w+) <attribute>* '>'
        <xml>
        '</'$0'>'
    };
    token attribute {
        \w+ '="' <-["<>]>* \"
    };

Now all tests pass, except the last two:

    ok 1 - 'abc'
    ok 2 - '<a></a>'
    ok 3 - '..<ab>foo</ab>dd'
    ok 4 - '<a><b>c</b></a>'
    ok 5 - '<a href="foo"><b>c</b></a>'
    ok 6 - '<a empty="" ><b>c</b></a>'
    ok 7 - '<a><b>c</b><c></c></a>'
    ok 8 - '<'
    ok 9 - '<a>b</b>'
    ok 10 - '<a>b</a'
    ok 11 - '<a>b</a href="">'
    not ok 12 - '<a/>'
    not ok 13 - '<a />'

These contain un-nested tags that are closed with a single slash C</>. No
problem to add that to rule C<tag>:

    rule tag   {
        '<'(\w+) <attribute>* [
            | '/>'
            | '>' <xml> '</'$0'>'
        ]
    };

All tests pass, we're happy, our first grammar works well.

=head2 More hacking

Playing with grammars is much more fun that reading about playing, so here's
what you could implement:

=over 4

=item * 

plain text can contain entities like C<&amp;>

=item * 

I don't know if xml tag names are allowed to begin with a number, but  the
current grammar allows that. You might look it up in the XML specification,
and adapt the grammar if needed.

=item *

plain text can contain C<< <![CDATA[ ... ]]> >> blocks, in which
xml-like tags are ignored and C<< < >> and the like don't need to be escaped

=item *

Real xml allows a preample like
C<< <?xml version="0.9" encoding="utf-8"?> >> and requires one root tag which
contains the rest (You'd have to change some of the existing test cases)

=item *

You could try to implement a pretty-printer for XML by recursively
walking through the match object C<$/>. (This is non-trivial; you might have
to work around a few Rakudo bugs, and maybe also introduce some new captures).

=back

(Please don't post solutions to this as comments in this blog; let others have
the same fun as you had ;-).

Have fun hacking.

=head1 MOTIVATION

It's powerful and fun

=head1 SEE ALSO

Regexes are specified in great detail in S05:
L<http://perlcabal.org/syn/S05.html>.

More working (!) examples of regexes and grammars can be found in the
I<November> project, a wiki engine written in Perl 6. See
L<http://github.com/viklund/november/>.
