=head1 NAME

"Perl 5 to 6" Lesson 22 - The State of the implementations

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    (none)

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Perl 6 is a language specification, and there are multiple compilers being
written that aim to implement Perl 6, and partially they already do.

=head2 Pugs

Pugs is a Perl 6 compiler written in Haskell. It was started by Audrey Tang,
and she also did most of the work. In terms of implemented features it is
certainly the most advanced implementation today (September 2008).

To build and test pugs, you have to install GHC 6.8 first, and then run
   
    svn co http://svn.pugscode.org/pugs
    cd pugs
    perl Makefile.PL
    make
    make test

That will install some Haskell dependencies locally and then build pugs. For
C<make test> you might need to install some Perl 5 modules, which you can do
with C<cpan Task::Smoke>.

Pugs hasn't been developed during the last year, but Audrey announced that she
would continue its development once GHC 6.10 is released, and already cleaned
up the build system a lot.

Pugs can parse most common constructs, implements object orientation, basic
regexes, nearly(?) all control structures, basic user defined operators and
macros, many builtins, contexts (except slice context), junctions, basic
multi dispatch and the reduction meta operator. It passes about 16000 tests
from the Perl 6 test suite.

=head2 Rakudo

Rakudo is a parrot based compiler for Perl 6. The main architect is Patrick
Michaud, many features were implemented by Jonathan Worthington.

It is hosted in the parrot svn repository, to build it run

    svn co https://svn.perl.org/parrot/trunk parrot
    perl Configure.pl && make
    cd languages/perl6/
    make perl6

Rakudo development is very active. At the time of writing it passes about 2300
test from the official test suite. Its progress in the test suite is monitored
on L<http://rakudo.de/>.

It implements most control structures, most syntaxes for number
literals, interpolation of scalars and closures, chained operators, C<BEGIN>-
and C<END> blocks, pointy subs, named, optional and slurpy arguments, basic
junctions and grammars.

=head2 Elf

Mitchell Charity started I<elf>, a bootstrapping compiler written in Perl 6,
with a grammar written in Ruby. Currently it has a Perl 5 backend, others are
in planning.

It lives in the pugs repositry, once you've checked it out you can go to
C<misc/elf/> and run C<./elf_f $filename>. You'll need ruby-1.9 and some perl
modules, about which elf will complain bitterly when they are not present.

C<elf> is developed in bursts of activity followed by weeks of low activity,
or even none at all.

It parses more than 70% of the test suite, but implements mostly features that 
are easy to emulate with Perl 5, and passes about 700 tests from the test
suite.

=head2 KindaPerl6

Flavio Glock started KindaPerl6 (short kp6), a mostly bootstapped Perl 6
compiler. Since the bootstrapped version is much too slow to be fun to develop
with, it is now waiting for a faster backend.

Kp6 implements object orientation, grammars and a few distinct features like
lazy gather/take. It also implements C<BEGIN> blocks, which was one of the
design goals.

=head2 v6.pm

C<v6> is a source filter for Perl 5. It was written by Flavio Glock, and
supports basic Perl 6 plus grammars. It is fairly stable and fast, and is
occasionally enhanced. It lives on the CPAN and in the pugs repository in
C<perl5/*/>.

=head2 SMOP

Smop stands for I<Simple Meta Object Programming> and doesn't plan to
implement all of Perl 6, it is designed as a backend (a little bit like
parrot, but very different in both design and feature set). Unlike the other
implements it aims explicitly at implementing Perl 6's powerful meta object
programming facilities, ie the ability to plug in different object systems.

It is implemented in C and various domain specific languages. It was designed
and implemented by Daniel Ruoso, with help from Yuval Kogman (design) and
Paweł Murias (implementation, DSLs). A grant from The Perl Foundation supports
its development, and it currently approaches the stage where one could begin
to emit code for it from another compiler.

It will then be used as a backend for either elf or kp6, and perhaps also for
pugs.

=head2 STD.pm

Larry Wall wrote a grammar for Perl 6 in Perl 6. He also wrote a cheating
script named C<gimme5>, which translates that grammar to Perl 5. It can parse
about every written and valid piece of Perl 6 that we know of, including the
whole test suite (apart from a few failures now and then when Larry
accidentially broke something).
 
STD.pm lives in the pugs repository, and can be run and tested with
perl-5.10.0 installed in C</usr/local/bin/perl> and a few perl modules (like
C<YAML::XS> and C<Moose>):

    cd src/perl6/
    make
    make testt      # warning: takes about 80 minutes,
                    # and generats 3GB of files in lex/
    ./tryfile $your_file
    perl STD5_dump_match $your_file

It correctly parses custom operators and warns about non-existant subs.

=head1 MOTIVATION

Many people ask why we need so many different implementations, and if it
wouldn't be better to focus on one instead.

There are basically three answers to that.

Firstly that's not how programming by volunteers work. People sometimes either
want to start something with the tools they like, or they think that one
aspect of Perl 6 is not sufficiently honoured by the design of the existing
implementations. Then they start a new project.

The second possible answer is that the projects explore different areas of the
vast Perl 6 language: SMOP explores meta object programming, rakudo and parrot
care a lot about efficient language interoperability and platform
independence, kp6 explored BEGIN blocks, and pugs was the first implementation
to explore the syntax, and many parts of the language for the first time.

The third answer is that we don't want a single point of failure. If we had
just one implementation, and had severe problems with one of them for
unforseeable reasons (technical, legal, personal, ...) we have possible
fallbacks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

Pugs: L<http://www.pugscode.org/>,
L<http://pugs.blogs.com/pugs/2008/07/pugshs-is-back.html>,
L<http://pugs.blogspot.com>, source:
L<http://svn.pugscode.org/pugs>.

Rakudo: L<http://www.parrotcode.org/>, L<http://www.rakudo.org/>, source:
L<https://svn.perl.org/parrot/trunk>.

Elf: L<http://perl.net.au/wiki/Elf> source: see pugs, C<misc/elf/>.

KindaPerl6: source: see pugs, C<v6/v6-KindaPerl6>.

v6.pm: source: see pugs, C<perl5/>.

STD.pm: source: see pugs, C<src/perl6/>.
