=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Rosetta::Migration -
Assist translating between various languages

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Rosetta::Model provides an effective language for defining relational data
models, both the means to create them and the means to interact with them;
see the documentation of L<Rosetta::Model> itself (in the current
distribution) for a further introduction.

This document, Rosetta::Migration ("Migration"), is intended to help
users of Rosetta::Model to map the concepts and syntax of their existing
database schemas and access specifications, between Rosetta::Model's native
language and their current forms, such as SQL:2003 and other SQL dialects,
and the "Tutorial D" relational data language, and various general purpose
programming languages like C and Perl.

This document should be helpful when converting applications to use
Rosetta::Model to define their relational database concerning structures
and tasks.  This document should also be helpful when creating a
Rosetta::Model-based API layer on top of an existing database manager, so
you know how to go about translating input and output to and from that
database manager, or when creating something like a SQL translating tool.

=head1 SEE ALSO

I<This documentation is pending.>

=head1 AUTHOR

Darren R. Duncan (C<perl@DarrenDuncan.net>)

=head1 LICENCE AND COPYRIGHT

This file is part of the Rosetta::Model database portability library.

Rosetta::Model is Copyright (c) 2002-2006, Darren R. Duncan.

See the LICENCE AND COPYRIGHT of L<Rosetta::Model> for details.

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS in L<Rosetta::Model> apply to this file too.

=cut
