=encoding utf8

=head1 TITLE

Synopsis 4: Blocks and Statements

=head1 AUTHOR

Larry Wall <larry@wall.org>

=head1 VERSION

  Maintainer: Larry Wall <larry@wall.org>
  Date: 19 Aug 2004
  Last Modified: 11 Aug 2006
  Number: 4
  Version: 33

This document summarizes Apocalypse 4, which covers the block and
statement syntax of Perl.

=head1 The Relationship of Blocks and Declarations

Every block is a closure.  (That is, in the abstract, they're all
anonymous subroutines that take a snapshot of their lexical scope.)
How a block is invoked and how its results are used are matters of
context, but closures all work the same on the inside.

Blocks are delimited by curlies, or by the beginning and end of the
current compilation unit (either the current file or the current
C<eval> string).  Unlike in Perl 5, there are (by policy) no implicit
blocks around standard control structures.  (You could write a macro
that violates this, but resist the urge.)  Variables that mediate
between an outer statement and an inner block (such as loop variables)
should generally be declared as formal parameters to that block.  There
are three ways to declare formal parameters to a closure.

    $func = sub ($a, $b) { print if $a eq $b };  # standard sub declaration
    $func = -> $a, $b { print if $a eq $b };     # a "pointy" block
    $func = { print if $^a eq $^b }              # placeholder arguments

A bare closure without placeholder arguments that uses C<$_>
(either explicitly or implicitly) is treated as though C<$_> were a
formal parameter:

    $func = { print if $_ };   # Same as: $func = -> $_ { print if $_ };
    $func("printme");

In any case, all formal parameters are the equivalent of C<my> variables
within the block.  See S06 for more on function parameters.

Except for such formal parameter declarations, all lexically scoped
declarations are visible from the point of declaration to the end of
the enclosing block.  Period.  Lexicals may not "leak" from a block to any
other external scope (at least, not without some explicit aliasing
action on the part of the block, such as exportation of a symbol
from a module).  The "point of declaration" is the moment the compiler
sees "C<my $foo>", not the end of the statement as in Perl 5, so

    my $x = $x;

will no longer see the value of the outer C<$x>; you'll need to say
either

    my $x = $OUTER::x;

or

    my $x = OUTER::<$x>;

instead.

If you declare a lexical twice in the same scope, it is the same lexical:

    my $x;
    my $x;

If you've referred to C<$x> prior to the first declaration, and the compiler
tentatively bound it to C<$OUTER::x>, then it's an error to declare it, and
the compiler is required to complain at that point.  If such use can't
be detected because it is hidden in an eval, then it is erroneous, since
the C<eval()> compiler might bind to either C<$OUTER::x> or the subsequently
declared "C<my $x>".

As in Perl 5, "C<our $foo>" introduces a lexically scoped alias for
a variable in the current package.

The new C<constant> declarator introduces a lexically scoped name
for a compile-time constant, either a variable or a 0-ary sub, which
may be initialized with either a pseudo-assignment or a block:

    constant Num $pi = 3;
    constant Num PI { 3 }
    constant Num π  = atan(2,2) * 4;

In any case the initializing value is evaluated at BEGIN time.

There is a new C<state> declarator that introduces a lexically scoped
variable like C<my> does, but with a lifetime that persists for the
life of the closure, so that it keeps its value from the end of one
call to the beginning of the next.  Separate clones of the closure
get separate state variables.

Perl 5's "C<local>" function has been renamed to C<temp> to better
reflect what it does.  There is also a C<let> function that sets a
hypothetical value.  It works exactly like C<temp>, except that the
value will be restored only if the current block exits unsuccessfully.
(See Definition of Success below for more.)  C<temp> and C<let> temporize
or hypotheticalize the value or the variable depending on whether you
do assignment or binding.  One other difference from Perl 5 is that
the default is not to undefine a variable.  So

    temp $x;

causes C<$x> to start with its current value.  Use

    temp undefine $x;

to get the Perl 5 behavior.

Note that temporizations that are undone upon scope exit must be
prepared to be redone if a continuation within that scope is taken.

=head1 Statement-ending blocks

A line ending with a closing brace "C<}>", followed by nothing but
whitespace or comments, will terminate a statement if an end of statement
can occur there.  That is, these two statements are equivalent:

    my $x = sub { 3 }
    my $x = sub { 3 };

End-of-statement cannot occur within a bracketed expression, so
this still works:

    my $x = [
        sub { 3 },  # this comma is not optional
        sub { 3 }   # the statement won't terminate here 
    ];

However, a nested hash block must be disambiguated by a trailing comma:

    # Without the trailing comma, this becomes a code block
    my $hash = {
        1 => { 2 => 3, 4 => 5 },
    };

Because subroutine declarations are expressions, not statements,
this is now invalid:

    sub f { 3 } sub g { 3 }     # two terms occur in a row

But these two are valid:

    sub f { 3 }; sub g { 3 };
    sub f { 3 }; sub g { 3 }    # the trailing semicolon is optional

=head1 Conditional statements

The C<if> and C<unless> statements work almost exactly as they do in
Perl 5, except that you may omit the parentheses on the conditional:

    if $foo == 123 {
	...
    }
    elsif $foo == 321 {
	...
    }
    else {
	...
    }

Conditional statement modifiers work as in Perl 5.  So do the
implicit conditionals implied by short-circuit operators.

=head1 Loop statements

Looping statement modifiers are the same as in Perl 5.
Loop modifiers C<next>, C<last>, and C<redo> also work as in Perl 5.

There is no longer a C<continue> block.  Instead, use a C<NEXT> block
within the body of the loop.  See below.

=head2 The C<while> and C<until> statements

The C<while> and C<until> statements work as in Perl 5, except that you
may leave out the parentheses around the conditional:

    while $bar < 100 {
	...
    }

=head2 The C<repeat> statement

Unlike in Perl 5, applying a statement modifier to a C<do> block is
specifically disallowed:


    do {
	...
    } while $x < 10;	# ILLEGAL

Instead, you should write the more Pascal-like C<repeat> loop:

    repeat {
	...
    } while $x < 10;

or equivalently:

    repeat {
	...
    } until $x >= 10;

Unlike Perl 5's C<do-while> loop, this is a real loop block now, so
C<next>, C<last>, and C<redo> work as expected.  The loop conditional
on a repeat block is required, so it will be recognized even if you
put it on a line by its own:

    repeat
    {
	...
    }
    while $x < 10;

However, that's likely to be visually confused with a following
C<while> loop at the best of times, so it's also allowed to put the
loop conditional at the front, with the same meaning. (The C<repeat>
keyword forces the conditional to be evaluated at the end of the loop,
so it's still C's do-while semantics.)  Therefore, even under GNU style
rules, the previous example may be rewritten into a very clear:

    repeat while $x < 10
      {
	...
      }

or equivalently:

    repeat until $x >= 10
      {
	...
      }

=head2 The general loop statement

The C<loop> statement is the C-style C<for> loop in disguise:

    loop ($i = 0; $i < 10; $i++) {
	...
    }

As in C, the parentheses are required if you supply the 3-part spec; however,
the 3-part loop spec may be entirely omitted to write an infinite loop.
That is,

    loop {...}

is equivalent to the Cish idiom:

    loop (;;) {...}

=head2 The C<for> statement

There is no C<foreach> statement any more. It's always spelled C<for>
in Perl 6, so it always takes a list as an argument:

    for @foo { print }

As mentioned earlier, the loop variable is named by passing a parameter
to the closure:

    for @foo -> $item { print $item }

Multiple parameters may be passed, in which case the list is traversed
more than one element at a time:

    for %hash.kv -> $key, $value { print "$key => $value\n" }

To process two arrays in parallel, use the C<each> function:

    for each(@a;@b) -> $a, $b { print "[$a, $b]\n" }

or use the C<zip> function to generate a list of C<Seq> objects that each can
be bound to multiple arguments enclosed in square brackets:

    for zip(@a;@b) -> [$a, $b] { print "[$a, $b]\n" }

The list is evaluated lazily by default, so instead of using a C<while>
to read a file a line at a time as you would in Perl 5:

    while (my $line = <STDIN>) {...}

in Perl 6 you should use a C<for> (plus a unary C<=> "iterate the
iterator" operator) instead:

    for =$*IN -> $line {...}

This has the added benefit of limiting the scope of the C<$line>
parameter to the block it's bound to.  (The C<while>'s declaration of
C<$line> continues to be visible past the end of the block.  Remember,
no implicit block scopes.)  It is also possible to write

    while =$*IN -> $line {...}

Note also that Perl 5's special rule causing

    while (<>) {...}

to automatically assign to C<$_> is not carried over to Perl 6.  That
should now be written:

    for =<> {...}

which is short for

    for =$*ARGS {...}

Parameters are by default readonly within the block.  You can
declare a parameter read/write by including the "C<is rw>" trait.
If you rely on C<$_> as the implicit parameter to a block,
then C<$_> is considered read/write by default.  That is,
the construct:

    for @foo {...}

is actually short for:

    for @foo -> $_ is rw {...}

so you can modify the current list element in that case.  However,
any time you specify the arguments, they default to read only.

When used as statement modifers, C<for> and C<given> use a private
instance of C<$_> for the left side of the statement.  The outer C<$_>
can be referred to as C<$OUTER::_>.  (And yes, this implies that the
compiler may have to retroactively change the binding of <$_> on the
left side.  But it's what people expect of a pronoun like "it".)

=head2 The do-once loop

In Perl 5, a bare block is deemed to be a do-once loop.  In Perl 6,
the bare block is not a do-once.  Instead C<do {...}> is the do-once
loop (which is another reason you can't put a C<while> or C<until>
modifier on it; use C<repeat> for that).

For any statement, prefixing with a C<do> allows you to 
return the value of that statement and use it in an expression:

    $x = do if $a { $b } else { $c };

This construct only allows you to prefix a statement.  If you want to
continue the expression after the statement you must use the curly form.

Since C<do> is defined as going in front of a statement, it follows
that it can always be followed by a statement label.  This is particularly
useful for the do-once block, since it is offically a loop and can take
therefore loop control statements.

Although a bare block is no longer a do-once loop, it still executes
immediately as in Perl 5, as if it were immediately dereferenced with
a C<.()> postfix, so within such a block C<CALLER::> refers to the
scope surrounding the block.  If you wish to return a closure from a
function, you must use an explicit prefix such as C<return> or C<sub>
or C<< -> >>.  (Use of a placeholder parameter is deemed insufficiently
explicit because it's not out front where it can be seen.  You can, of
course, use a placeholder parameter if you also use C<return>.)

=head1 Switch statements

A switch statement is a means of topicalizing, so the switch keyword
is the English topicalizer, C<given>.  The keyword for individual
cases is C<when>:

    given EXPR {
        when EXPR { ... }
        when EXPR { ... }
        default { ... }
    }

The current topic is always aliased to the special variable C<$_>.
The C<given> block is just one way to set the current topic, but a
switch statement can be any block that sets C<$_>, including a C<for>
loop (in which the first loop parameter is the topic) or the body
of a method (if you have declared the invocant as C<$_>).  So switching
behavior is actually caused by the C<when> statements in the block,
not by the nature of the block itself.  A C<when> statement implicitly
does a "smart match" between the current topic (C<$_>) and the argument
of the C<when>.  If the smart match succeeds, the associated closure
is executed, and the surrounding block is automatically broken out
of.  If the smart match fails, control passes to the next statement
normally, which may or may not be a C<when> statement.  Since C<when>
statements are presumed to be executed in order like normal statements,
it's not required that all the statements in a switch block be C<when>
statements (though it helps the optimizer to have a sequence of
contiguous C<when> statements, because then it can arrange to jump
directly to the first appropriate test that might possibly match.)

The default case:

    default {...}

is exactly equivalent to

    when * {...}

Because C<when> statements are executed in order, the default must
come last.  You don't have to use an explicit default--you can just
fall off the last C<when> into ordinary code.  But use of a C<default>
block is good documentation.

If you use a C<for> loop with a named parameter, the parameter is
also aliased to C<$_> so that it can function as the topic of any
C<when> statements within the loop.  If you use a C<for> statement
with multiple parameters, only the first parameter is aliased to C<$_>
as the topic.

You can explicitly break out of a C<when> block (and its surrounding
switch) early using the C<break> verb.  You can explicitly break out
of a C<when> block and go to the next statement by using C<continue>.
(Note that, unlike C's idea of falling through, subsequent C<when>
conditions are evaluated.  To jump into the next C<when> block you
must use a C<goto>.)

If you have a switch that is the main block of a C<for> loop, and
you break out of the switch either implicitly or explicitly, it merely
goes to the next iteration of the loop.  You must use C<last> to break
out of the entire loop early.  Of course, an explicit C<next> would
be clearer than a C<break> if you really want to go to the next iteration.
Possibly we'll outlaw C<break> in a loop topicalizer.

=head1 Exception handlers

Unlike many other languages, Perl 6 specifies exception handlers by
placing a C<CATCH> block I<within> that block that is having its exceptions
handled.

The Perl 6 equivalent to Perl 5's C<eval {...}> is C<try {...}>.
(Perl 6's C<eval> function only evaluates strings, not blocks.)
A C<try> block by default has a C<CATCH> block that handles all
exceptions by ignoring them.  If you define a C<CATCH> block within
the C<try>, it replaces the default C<CATCH>.  It also makes the C<try>
keyword redundant, because any block can function as a C<try> block
if you put a C<CATCH> block within it.

An exception handler is just a switch statement on an implicit topic
supplied within the C<CATCH> block.  That implicit topic is the current
exception object, also known as C<$!>.  Inside the C<CATCH> block, it's
also bound to C<$_>, since it's the topic.  Because of smart matching,
ordinary C<when> statements are sufficiently powerful to pattern
match the current exception against classes or patterns or numbers
without any special syntax for exception handlers.  If none of the
cases in the C<CATCH> handles the exception, the exception is rethrown.
To ignore all unhandled exceptions, use an empty C<default> case.
(In other words, there is an implicit C<die $!> just inside the end
of the C<CATCH> block.  Handled exceptions break out past this implicit
rethrow.)

A C<CATCH> block sees the lexical scope in which it was defined, but
its caller is the dynamic location that threw the exception.  That is,
the stack is not unwound until some exception handler chooses to
unwind it by "handling" the exception in question.  So logically,
if the C<CATCH> block throws its own exception, you would expect the
C<CATCH> block to catch its own exception recursively forever.  However,
a C<CATCH> must not behave that way, so we say that a C<CATCH> block
never attempts to handle any exception thrown within its own dynamic scope.
(Otherwise the C<die> in the previous paragraph would never work.)

=head1 Control Exceptions

All abnormal control flow is, in the general case, handled by the
exception mechanism (which is likely to be optimized away in specific
cases.)  Here "abnormal" means any transfer of control outward that
is not just falling off the end of a block.  A C<return>,
for example, is considered a form of abnormal control flow, since it
can jump out of multiple levels of closures to the end of the scope
of the current subroutine definition.  Loop commands like C<next>
are abnormal, but looping because you hit the end of the block is not.
The implicit break of a C<when> block is abnormal.

A C<CATCH> block handles only "bad" exceptions, and lets control
exceptions pass unhindered.  Control exceptions may be caught with a
C<CONTROL> block.  Generally you don't need to worry about this unless
you're defining a control construct.  You may have one C<CATCH> block
and one C<CONTROL> block, since some user-defined constructs may wish to
supply an implicit C<CONTROL> block to your closure, but let you define
your own C<CATCH> block.

A C<return> always exits from the lexically surrounding sub
or method definition (that is, from a function officially declared
with the C<sub>, C<method>, or C<submethod> keywords).  Pointy blocks
and bare closures are transparent to C<return>.  If you pass a closure
object outside of its official "sub" scope, it is illegal to
return from it.  You may only leave the closure block itself with C<leave>
or by falling off the end of it.

To return a value from a pointy block or bare closure, you either
just let the block return the value of its final expression, or you can
use C<leave>.  A C<leave> by default exits from the innermost block.
But you may change the behavior of C<leave> with selector adverbs:

    leave :from(Loop) :label<LINE> <== 1,2,3;	# XXX "with"?

The innermost block matching the selection criteria will be exited.
The return value, if any, must be passed as a list.  To return pairs
as part of the value, you can use a feed operator:

    leave <== :foo:bar:baz(1) if $leaving;

or going the other way:

    $leaving and :foo:bar:baz(1) ==> leave;

In theory, any user-defined control construct can catch any control
exception it likes.  However, there have to be some culturally enforced
standards on which constructs capture which exceptions.  Much like
C<return> may only return from an "official" subroutine or method,
a loop exit like C<next> should be caught by the construct the user
expects it to be caught by.  In particular, if the user labels a loop
with a specific label, and calls a loop control from within the lexical
scope of that loop, and if that call mentions the outer loop's label,
then that outer loop is the one that must be controlled. (This search
of lexical scopes is limited to the current "official" subroutine.)

If there is no such lexically scoped outer loop in the current subroutine,
then a fallback search is made outward through the dynamic scopes in
the same way Perl 5 does.  (The difference between Perl 5 and Perl 6
in this respect arises only because Perl 5 didn't have user-defined
control structures, hence the sub's lexical scope was I<always>
the innermost dynamic scope, so the preference to the lexical scope
in the current sub was implicit.  For Perl 6 we have to make this
preference explicit.)

Warnings are produced in Perl 6 by throwing a resumable control
exception to the outermost scope, which by default prints the
warning and resumes the exception by extracting a resume continuation
from the exception, which must be supplied by the warn() function
(or equivalent).  Exceptions are not resumable in Perl 6 unless
the exception object does the C<Resumable> role.  (Note that fatal
exception types can do the C<Resumable> role even if thrown via
C<fail()>--when uncaught they just hit the outermost fatal handler
instead of the outermost warning handler, so some inner scope has to
explicitly treat them as warnings and resume them.)

Since warnings are processed using the standard control exception
mechanism, they may be intercepted and either suppressed or fatalized
anywhere within the dynamic scope by supplying a suitable C<CONTROL>
block.  This dynamic control is orthogonal to any lexically scoped
warning controls, which merely decide whether to call C<warn()>
in the first place.

As with calls to C<return>, the warning control exception is an
abstraction that the compiler is free to optimize away (along with the
associated continuation) when the compiler or runtime can determine
that the semantics would be preserved by merely printing out the
error and going on.  Since all exception handlers run in the dynamic
context of the throw, that reduces to simply returning from the C<warn>
function most of the time.

=head1 The goto statement

In addition to C<next>, C<last>, and C<redo>, Perl 6 also supports
C<goto>.  As with ordinary loop controls, the label is searched for
first lexically within the current subroutine, then dynamically outside
of it.  Unlike with loop controls, however, scanning a scope includes
a scan of any lexical scopes included within the current candidate
scope.  As in Perl 5, it is possible to C<goto> into a lexical scope,
but only for lexical scopes that require no special initialization
of parameters.  (Initialization of ordinary variables does not
count--presumably the presence of a label will prevent code-movement
optimizations past the label.)  So, for instance, it's always possible
to C<goto> into the next case of a C<when> or into either the "then"
or "else" branch of a conditional.  You may not go into a C<given>
or a C<for>, though, because that would bypass a formal parameter
binding (not to mention list generation in the case of C<for>).
(Note: the implicit default binding of an outer $_ to an inner $_
can be emulated for a bare block, so that doesn't fall under the
prohibition on bypassing formal binding.)

=head1 Exceptions

As in Perl 5, many built-in functions simply return undef when you ask
for a value out of range, or the function fails somehow.  Perl 6 has
C<Failure> objects, any of which refers to an unthrown C<Exception> object in
C<$!> and knows whether it has been handled or not.

If you test a C<Failure> for C<.defined> or C<.true>, it causes
C<$!> to mark the exception as I<handled>, and acts as a harmless C<Undef>
value thereafter.  Any other use of the C<Failure> will throw its associated
exception immediately.

Because the contextual variable C<$!> contains all exceptions collected in the
current lexical scope, saying C<die $!> will throw all exceptions,
whether they were handled or not.  A bare C<die>/C<fail> takes C<$!> as the
default argument.

At scope exit, C<$!> discards all handled exceptions from itself, then performs
a garbage-collection check for all remaining (unhandled) exceptions.  If all of
them are still alive (e.g. by becoming part of the return value), then they are
appended to C<< CALLER::<$!> >>.  Otherwise, it calls C<die> to throw those
exceptions as a single new exception, which may then be caught with a C<CATCH>
block in the current (or caller's) scope.

You can cause built-ins to automatically throw exceptions on failure using

    use fatal;

The C<fail> function responds to the caller's C<use fatal> state.  It
either returns an unthrown exception, or throws the exception.

=head1 Closure traits

A C<CATCH> block is just a trait of the closure containing it.  Other
blocks can be installed as traits as well.  These other blocks are
called at various times, and some of them respond to various control
exceptions and exit values:

      BEGIN {...}*	at compile time, ASAP, only ever runs once
      CHECK {...}*	at compile time, ALAP, only ever runs once
       INIT {...}*	at run time, ASAP, only ever runs once
        END {...}	at run time, ALAP, only ever runs once

      START {...}*	on first ever execution, once per closure clone

      ENTER {...}*	at every block entry time, repeats on loop blocks.
      LEAVE {...}	at every block exit time 
       KEEP {...}	at every successful block exit, part of LEAVE queue
       UNDO {...}	at every unsuccessful block exit, part of LEAVE queue

      FIRST {...}*	at loop initialization time, before any ENTER
       NEXT {...}	at loop continuation time, after any LEAVE
       LAST {...}	at loop termination time, after any LEAVE

        PRE {...}	assert precondition at every block entry, before any
       POST {...}	assert postcondition at every block exit, after any

      CATCH {...}	catch exceptions, before LEAVE
    CONTROL {...}	catch control exceptions, before LEAVE

Those marked with a C<*> can also be used within an expression:

    my $compiletime = BEGIN { localtime };
    our $temphandle = START { maketemp() };

Code that is generated at run time can still fire off C<CHECK>
and C<INIT> blocks, though of course those blocks can't do things that
would require travel back in time.

Some of these also have corresponding traits that can be set on variables.
These have the advantage of passing the variable in question into
the closure as its topic:

    my $r will start { .set_random_seed() };
    our $h will enter { .rememberit() } will undo { .forgetit() };

Apart from C<CATCH> and C<CONTROL>, which can only occur once, most
of these can occur multiple times within the block.  So they aren't
really traits, exactly--they add themselves onto a list stored in the
actual trait (except for C<START>, which executes inline).  So if you
examine the C<ENTER> trait of a block, you'll find that it's really
a list of closures rather than a single closure.

The semantics of C<INIT> and C<START> are not equivalent to each
other in the case of cloned closures.  An C<INIT> only runs once for
all copies of a cloned closure.  A C<START> runs separately for each
clone, so separate clones can keep separate state variables:

    our $i = 0;
    ...
    $func = { state $x will start { $x = $i++ }; dostuff($i) };

But C<state> automatically applies "start" semantics to any initializer,
so this also works:

    $func = { state $x = $i++; dostuff($i) }

Each subsequent clone gets an initial state that is one higher than the
previous, and each clone maintains its own state of C<$x>, because that's
what C<state> variables do.

Even in the absence of closure cloning, C<INIT> runs before the
mainline code, while C<START> puts off the initialization till the
last possible moment, then runs exactly once, and caches its value
for all subsequent calls (assuming it wasn't called in void context,
in which case the C<START> is evaluated once only for its side effects).

All of these trait blocks can see any previously declared lexical
variables, even if those variables have not been elaborated yet when
the closure is invoked (in which case the variables evaluate to an
undefined value.)

Note: Apocalypse 4 confused the notions of C<PRE>/C<POST> with C<ENTER>/C<LEAVE>.
These are now separate notions.  C<ENTER> and C<LEAVE> are used only for
their side effects.  C<PRE> and C<POST> must return boolean values that are
evaluated according to the usual Design by Contract (DBC) rules.  (Plus,
if you use C<ENTER>/C<LEAVE> in a class block, they only execute when the
class block is executed, but C<PRE>/C<POST> in a class block are evaluated
around every method in the class.)  C<KEEP> and C<UNDO> are just variants
of C<LEAVE>, and for execution order are treated as part of the queue of
C<LEAVE> blocks.

[Note: the name C<FIRST> used to be associated with C<state>
declarations.  Now it is associated only with loops.  See the C<START>
above for C<state> semantics.]

C<LEAVE> blocks are evaluated after C<CATCH> and C<CONTROL> blocks, including
the C<LEAVE> variants, C<KEEP> and C<UNDO>.  C<POST> blocks are evaluated after
everything else, to guarantee that even C<LEAVE> blocks can't violate DBC.
Likewise C<PRE> blocks fire off before any C<ENTER> or C<FIRST> (though not
before C<BEGIN>, C<CHECK>, or C<INIT>, since those are done at compile or
process initialization time).

=head1 Statement parsing

In this statement:

    given EXPR {
        when EXPR { ... }
        when EXPR { ... }
        ...
    }

parentheses aren't necessary around C<EXPR> because the whitespace
between C<EXPR> and the block forces the block to be considered a
block rather than a subscript.  This works for all control structures,
not just the new ones in Perl 6.  A top-level bare block
is always considered a statement block if there's space
before it:

    if $foo { ... }
    elsif $bar { ... }
    else { ... }
    while $more { ... }
    for 1..10 { ... }

You can still parenthesize the expression argument for old times'
sake, as long as there's a space between the closing paren and the
opening brace.  You I<must> parenthesize the expression if there is
a bare block or pointy block that would be misinterpreted as the statement's
block.  This is regardless of whether a term or operator is expected where
the block occurs.  (A block inside brackets, or used as a
postcircumfix is fine, though.)  Any block with whitespace
in front of it will be taken as terminating the conditional, even if
the conditional expression could take another argument.  Therefore

    if rand { say "exists" } { extra() }
    if rand -> $x { say "exists" } { extra() }

is always parsed as

    if (rand) { say "exists" }; { extra() }
    if (rand) -> $x { say "exists" }; { extra() }

rather than

    if (rand { say "exists" }) { extra() }
    if (rand (-> $x { say "exists" })) { extra() }

Apart from that, it is illegal to use a bare closure where an
operator is expected.  (Remove the whitespace if you wish it to be
a postcircumfix.)

Anywhere a term is expected, a block is taken to be a closure definition
(an anonymous subroutine).  If the closure is empty, or appears to contain
nothing but a comma-separated list starting with a pair or a hash (counting
a single pair or hash as a list of one element), the closure will be
immediately executed as a hash composer.

    $hash = { };
    $hash = { %stuff };
    $hash = { "a" => 1 };
    $hash = { "a" => 1, $b, $c, %stuff, @nonsense };

    $code = { ; };
    $code = { @stuff };
    $code = { "a", 1 };
    $code = { "a" => 1, $b, $c ==> print };

If you wish to be less ambiguous, the C<hash> list operator will
explicitly evaluate a list and compose a hash of the returned value,
while C<sub> introduces an anonymous subroutine:

    $code = sub { "a" => 1 };
    $hash = hash("a" => 1);
    $hash = hash("a", 1);

If a closure is the right argument of the dot operator, the closure
is interpreted as a hash subscript.

    $code = {$x};	# closure because term expected
    if $term{$x}	# subscript because postfix expected
    if $term {$x}	# expression followed by statement block
    if $term.{$x}	# valid subscript with dot
    if $term\ .{$x}	# valid subscript with "long dot"

Similar rules apply to array subscripts:

    $array = [$x];	# array composer because term expected
    if $term[$x]	# subscript because postfix expected
    if $term [$x]	# syntax error (two terms in a row)
    if $term.[$x]	# valid subscript with dot
    if $term\ .[$x]	# valid subscript with "long dot"

And to the parentheses delimiting function arguments:

    $scalar = ($x);	# grouping parens because term expected
    if $term($x)	# function call because operator expected
    if $term ($x)	# syntax error (two terms in a row)
    if $term.($x)	# valid function call with dot
    if $term\ .($x)	# valid function call with "long dot"

Outside of any kind of expression brackets, a final closing curly
on a line (not counting whitespace or comments) always reverts
to the precedence of semicolon whether or not you put a semicolon
after it.  (In the absence of an explicit semicolon, the current
statement may continue on a subsequent line, but only with valid
statement continuators such as C<else> that cannot be confused with
the beginning of a new statement.  Anything else, such as a statement
modifier (on, say, a C<loop> statement) must continue on the same line,
unless the newline be escaped using the "unspace" construct--see S02.)

Final blocks on statement-level constructs always imply semicolon
precedence afterwards regardless of the position of the closing curly.
Statement-level constructs are distinguished in the grammar by being
declared in the statement syntactic group:

    macro statement_control:<if> ($expr, &ifblock) {...}
    macro statement_control:<while> ($expr, &whileblock) {...}
    macro statement_control:<BEGIN> (&beginblock) {...}

Statement-level constructs may start only where the parser is expecting
the start of a statement.  To embed a statement in an expression you
must use something like C<do {...}> or C<try {...}>.

    $x =  do { given $foo { when 1 {2} when 3 {4} }} + $bar;
    $x = try { given $foo { when 1 {2} when 3 {4} }} + $bar;

The existence of a C<< statement_control:<BEGIN> >> does not preclude us from
also defining a C<< prefix:<BEGIN> >> that I<can> be used within an expression:

    macro prefix:<BEGIN> (&beginblock) { beginblock().repr }

Then you can say things like:

    $recompile_by = BEGIN { time } + $expiration_time;

But C<< statement_control:<BEGIN> >> hides C<< prefix:<BEGIN> >> at the start of a statement.
You could also conceivably define a C<< prefix:<if> >>, but then you may not
get what you want when you say:

    .print if $foo;

since C<< prefix:<if> >> would hide C<< statement_modifier:<if> >>.

Built-in statement-level keywords require whitespace between the
keyword and the first argument, as well as before any terminating loop.
In particular, a syntax error will be reported for C-isms such as these:

    if(...) {...}
    while(...) {...}
    for(...) {...}

=head1 Definition of Success

Hypothetical variables are somewhat transactional--they keep their
new values only on successful exit of the current block, and otherwise
are rolled back to their original values.

It is, of course, a failure to leave the block by propagating an error
exception, though returning a defined value after catching an exception
is okay.

In the absence of error exception propagation, a successful exit is one that
returns a defined value in scalar context, or any number of values
in list context as long as the length is defined.  (A length of +Inf
is considered a defined length.  A length of 0 is also a defined length,
which means it's a "successful" return even though the list would evaluate
to false in a boolean context.)  A list can have a defined length
even if it contains undefined scalar values.  A list is of undefined
length only if it contains an undefined generator, which, happily, is
what is returned by the C<undef> function when used in list context.
So any Perl 6 function can say

    return undef;

and not care about whether the function is being called in scalar or list
context.  To return an explicit scalar undef, you can always say

    return scalar(undef);

Then in list context, you're returning a list of length 1, which is
defined (much like in Perl 5).  But generally you should be using
C<fail> in such a case to return an exception object.  Exception
objects also behave like undefined generators in list context.
In any case, returning an unthrown exception is considered failure
from the standpoint of C<let>.  Backtracking over a closure in a regex
is also considered failure of the closure, which is how hypothetical
variables are managed by regexes.  (And on the flip side, use of C<fail>
within a regex closure initiates backtracking of the regex.)

=head1 When is a closure not a closure

Everything is conceptually a closure in Perl 6, but the optimizer
is free to turn unreferenced closures into mere blocks of code.
It is also free to turn referenced closures into mere anonymous
subroutines if the block does not refer to any external lexicals that
should themselves be cloned.  In particular, named subroutines in any
scope do not consider themselves closures unless you take a reference
to them.  So

    sub foo {
	my $x = 1;
	my sub bar { print $x }		# not cloned yet
	my &baz = { bar(); print $x };	# cloned immediately
	my $code = &bar;		# now bar is cloned
	return &baz;
    }

When we say "clone", we mean the way the system takes a snapshot of the
routine's lexical scope and binds it to the current instance of the routine
so that if you ever use the current reference to the routine, it gets
the current snapshot of its world, lexically speaking.

Some closures produce C<Code> objects at compile time that cannot be
cloned, because they're not attached to any runtime code that can
actually clone them.  C<BEGIN>, C<CHECK>, C<INIT>, and C<END> blocks
fall into this category.  Therefore you can't reliably refer to
run-time variables from these closures even if they appear to be in the
scope.  (The compile-time closure may, in fact, see some kind of permanent
copy of the variable for some storage classes, but the variable is
likely to be undefined when the closure is run in any case.)  It's
only safe to refer to package variables and file-scoped lexicals from
such a routine.

On the other hand, it is required that C<CATCH> and C<LEAVE> blocks be able
to see transient variables in their current lexical scope, so their
cloning status depends at least on the cloning status of the block
they're in.
