=encoding utf8

=head1 TITLE

Synopsis 9: Data Structures

=head1 AUTHOR

Larry Wall <larry@wall.org>

=head1 VERSION

  Maintainer: Larry Wall <larry@wall.org>
  Date: 13 Sep 2004
  Last Modified: 14 Mar 2007
  Number: 9
  Version: 18

=head1 Overview

This synopsis summarizes the non-existent Apocalypse 9, which
discussed in detail the design of Perl 6 data structures.  It was
primarily a discussion of how the existing features of Perl 6 combine
to make it easier for the PDL folks to write numeric Perl.

=head1 Lazy lists

All list contexts are lazy by default.  They still flatten eventually,
but only when forced to.  You have to use the C<eager> list operator to get a
non-lazy flattening list context (that is, to flatten immediately like Perl 5).

=head1 Sized types

Sized low-level types are named most generally by appending the number
of bits to a generic low-level type name:

    int1
    int2
    int4
    int8
    int16
    int32       (aka int on 32-bit machines)
    int64       (aka int on 64-bit machines)

    uint1       (aka bit)
    uint2
    uint4
    uint8       (aka byte)
    uint16
    uint32
    uint64

    num16
    num32
    num64       (aka num on most architectures)
    num128

    complex16
    complex32
    complex64   (aka complex on most architectures)
    complex128

    buf8        aka buf, a "normal" byte buffer
    buf16       a uint16 buffer
    buf32       a uint32 buffer
    buf64       a uint64 buffer

Complex sizes indicate the size of each C<num> component rather than
the total.  This would extend to tensor typenames as well if they're
built-in types.  Of course, the typical tensor structure is just
reflected in the dimensions of the array--but the principle still holds
that the name is based on the number of bits of the simple base type.

The unsized types C<int> and C<num> are based on the architecture's
normal size for C<int> and C<double> in whatever version of C the
run-time system (presumably Parrot) is compiled in.  So C<int>
typically means C<int32> or C<int64>, while C<num> usually means
C<num64>, and C<complex> means two of whatever C<num> turns out to be.

You are, of course, free to use macros or type declarations to
associate additional names, such as "short" or "single".  These are
not provided by default.  An implementation of Perl is not required
to support 64-bit integer types or 128-bit floating-point types unless
the underlying architecture supports them.  16-bit floating-point is
also considered optional in this sense.

And yes, an C<int1> can store only -1 or 0.  I'm sure someone'll think of
a use for it...

Note that these are primarily intended to represent storage types;
the compiler is generally free to keep all intermediate results in
wider types in the absence of declarations or explicit casts to the
contrary.  Attempts to store an intermediate result in a location
that cannot hold it will generally produce a warning on overflow.
Underflow may also warn depending on the pragmatic context and use
of explicit rounding operators.  The default rounding mode from
C<Num> to C<Int> is to truncate the fractional part without warning.
(Note that warnings are by definition resumable exceptions; however,
an exception handler is free to either transform such a warning into
a fatal exception or ignore it completely.)

An explicit cast to a storage type has the same potential to throw an
exception as the actual attempt to store to such a storage location
would.

With IEEE floating-point types, we have a bias towards the use
of in-band C<+Inf>, C<-Inf>, and C<NaN> values in preference to
throwing an exception, since this is construed as friendlier to vector
processing and pipelining.  Object types such as C<Num> and C<Int>
may store additional information about the nature of the failure,
perhaps as an unthrown exception or warning.

=head1 Compact structs

A class whose attributes are all low-level value types can behave as
a struct.  (Access from outside the class is still only through
accessors, though, except when the address of a serialized version of
the object is used or generated for interfacing to C-like languages.)
Whether such a class is actually stored compactly is up to the
implementation, but it ought to behave that way, at least to the
extent that it's trivially easy (from the user's perspective) to read
and write to the equivalent C structure.  That is, when serialized
or deserialized to the C view, it should look like the C struct,
even if that's not how it's actually represented inside the class.
(This is to be construed as a substitute for at least some of the
current uses of C<pack>/C<unpack>.)  Of course, a lazy implementation will
probably find it easiest just to keep the object in its serialized form
all the time.  In particular, an array of compact structs must be stored
in their serialized form (see next section).

For types that exist in the C programming language, the serialized
mapping in memory should follow the same alignment and padding
rules by default.  Integers smaller than a byte are packed into a
power-of-two number of bits, so a byte holds four 2-bit integers.
Datum sizes that are not a power of two bits are not supported
unless declared by the user with sufficient information to determine
how to lay them out in memory, possibly with a pack/unpack format
associated with the class, or with the strange elements of the class,
or with the types under which the strange element is declared.

Note that a compact struct is itself a value type, so except for
performance considerations, it doesn't matter how many representations
of it there are in memory as long as those are consistent.

The packing serialization is performed by coercion to an appropriate
buffer type.  The unpacking is performed by coercion of such a buffer
type back to the type of the compact struct.

=head1 Compact arrays

In declarations of the form:

    my bit @bits;
    my int @ints;
    my num @nums;
    my int4 @nybbles;
    my buf @buffers;
    my complex128 @longdoublecomplex;
    my Array @ragged2d;

the presence of a low-level type tells Perl that it is free to
implement the array with "compact storage", that is, with a chunk
of memory containing contiguous (or as contiguous as practical)
elements of the specified type without any fancy object boxing that
typically applies to undifferentiated scalars.  (Perl tries really
hard to make these elements look like objects when you treat them
like objects--this is called autoboxing.)

A compact array is for most purposes interchangeable with the
corresponding buffer type.  For example, apart from the sigil,
these are equivalent declarations:

    my uint8 @buffer;
    my buf8 $buffer;

(Note: If you actually said both of those, you'd still get two
different names, since the sigil is part of the name.)

So given C<@buffer> you can say

    $piece = substr(@buffer, $beg, $end - $beg);

and given C<$buffer> you can also say

    @pieces = $buffer[$n..^$end];

Note that subscripting still pulls the elements out as numbers,
but C<substr()> returns a buffer of the same type.

For types that exist in the C programming language, the mapping in
memory should follow the same alignment rules, at least in the absence
of any declaration to the contrary.  For interfacing to C pointer
types, any buffer type may be used for its memory pointer; note,
however, that the buffer knows its length, while in C that length
typically must be passed as a separate argument, so the C interfacing
code needs to support this whenever possible, lest Perl inherit all
the buffer overrun bugs bequeathed on us by C.  Random C pointers
should never be converted to buffers unless the length is also known.
(Any call to strlen() should generally be considered a security hole.)
The size of any buffer type in bytes may be found with the C<.bytes>
method, even if the type of the buffer elements is not C<byte>.
(Strings may be asked for their size in bytes only if they support
a buffer type as their minimum abstraction level, hopefully with a
known encoding.  Otherwise you must encode them explicitly from the
higher-level abstraction into some buffer type.)

=head1 Multidimensional arrays

The declarations above declare one-dimensional arrays of indeterminate
length.  Such arrays are autoextending just like ordinary Perl arrays
(at the price of occasionally copying the block of data to another
memory location, or using a tree structure).  For many purposes,
though, it's useful to define array types of a particular size and
shape that, instead of autoextending, throw an exception if you try
to access outside their declared dimensionality.  Such arrays tend
to be faster to allocate and access as well.  (The language must,
however, continue to protect you against overflow--these days, that's
not just a reliability issue, but also a security issue.)

A multidimensional array is indexed by a semicolon list, which is really
a list of feeds in disguise.  Each sublist is a slice/feed of one particular
dimension.  So

    @array[0..10; 42; @x]

is really short for

    @array.postcircumfix:<[ ]>( <== 0..10 <== 42 <== @x );

The compiler is free to optimize to something faster when it is known
that lazy multidimensional subscripts are not necessary.

Note that

    @array[@x,@y]

is always interpreted as a one-dimensional slice in the outermost
dimension, which is the same as:

    @array[@x,@y;]

or more verbosely:

    @array.postcircumfix:<[ ]>( <== @x,@y );

To interpolate an array at the semicolon level rather than the comma level,
use the C<[;]> reduce operator:

    @array[[;] @x]

which is equivalent to

    @array.postcircumfix:<[ ]>( <== @x[0] <== @x[1] <== @x[2]..*);

Alternately, use a multislice array, indicated by a double C<@@> sigil:

    @array[@@x]

Multislice arrays can keep track of their dimensionality as they
are being defined.  Use of multislice syntax can then pull out those
distinct dimensions:

    my @@x;
    @@x <==  %hash.keys.grep: {/^X/};
    @@x <== =<>;
    @@x <== 1..*;
    @@x <== gather { loop { take rand 100 } };

    %hash{@@x}

Conjecture, since @@x and @x are really the same object, any array can
keep track of its dimensionality, and it only matters how you use it
in contexts that care about the dimensionality:

    my @x;
    @x <==  %hash.keys.grep: {/^X/};
    @x <== =<>;
    @x <== 1..*;
    @x <== gather { loop { take rand 100 } };

    %hash{@@x}  # multidimensional
    %hash{@x}   # flattened

To declare a multidimensional array, you may declare it with a signature as
if it were a function returning I<one> of its entries:

    my num @nums (Int);   # one dimension, @nums[Int]

or alternately:

    my @nums (Int --> num);   # one dimension, @nums[Int]

You can use ranges as types:

    my @nums (0..2 --> num);   # one dimension, @nums[0..2]
    my @ints (0..3, 0..1 --> int);   # one dimension, @ints[0..3; 0..1]

That includes the "upto" range type:

    my @ints (^4, ^2 --> int);   # one dimension, @ints[0..3; 0..1]

You can pretend you're programming in Fortran, or awk:

    my int @ints (1..4, 1..2); # two dimensions, @ints[1..4; 1..2]

Note that this only influences your view of the array in the current
lexical scope, not the actual shape of the array.  If you pass
this array to another module, it will see it as having a shape
of C<(0..3,0..1)> unless it also declares a variable to view it
differently.

Alternately, you may declare it using a prototype subscript,
but then you must remember to use semicolons instead of commas to
separate dimensions, because each slice represents an enumeration of
the possible values, so the following are all equivalent:

    my @ints (0..3, 0..1 --> int);
    my int @ints (0..3, 0..1);
    my int @ints[^4;^2];
    my int @ints[0..3; 0..1];
    my int @ints[0,1,2,3; 0,1];

You can pass a multislice for the shape as well:

    @@fooshape = (0..3; 0..1);
    my int @ints[[;]@fooshape];
    my int @ints[@@fooshape];   # same thing

Again, the C<[;]> list operator interpolates a list into a semicolon
list, which we do for consistency with subscript notation, not because
it makes a great deal of sense to allow slices for dimensional specs
(apart from ranges).  So while the following is okay:

    my int @ints[0,1,2,3,4];    # same as 0..4

the following is a semantic error that the compiler should catch:

    my int @ints[^3,^3,^3];     # oops, comma instead of semicolon

The shape may be supplied entirely by the object at run-time:

    my num @nums = Array of num.new(:shape(^3;^3;^3));
    my num @nums .=new():shape(^3;^3;^3); # same thing 

Any dimension of the array may be specified as "C<Int>", in which case
that dimension will autoextend.  Typically this would be used in the
final dimension to make a ragged array functionally equivalent to an
array of arrays:

    my int @ints[^42; Int];
    push(@ints[41], getsomeints());

The shape may also be specified by types rather than sizes:

    my int @ints[Even; Odd];

or by both:

    my int @ints[0..100 where Even; 1..99 where Odd];

(presuming C<Even> and C<Odd> are types already constrained to be even or odd).

The C<Whatever> type will be taken to mean C<Int> within an array
subscript, so you can also write:

    my int @ints[^42; *];

Saying

    my int @ints[^42; **];

would give you an array of indeterminate dimensionality.

=head1 PDL support

An array C<@array> can be tied to a PDL at declaration time:

    my num @array[@@mytensorshape] is PDL;
    my @array is PDL(:shape(^2;^2;^2;^2)) of int8;

PDLs are allowed to assume a type of C<num> by default rather than
the usual simple scalar.  (And in general, the type info is merely
made available to the "tie" implementation to do with what it will.
Some data structures may ignore the "of" type and just store everything
as general scalars.  Too bad...)

Arrays by default are one dimensional, but may be declared to have any
dimensionality supported by the implementation.  You may use arrays
just like scalars -- the main caveat is that you have to use
binding rather than assignment to set one without copying:

    @b := @a[0..*:by(2)]

With PDLs in particular, this might alias each of the individual
elements rather than the array as a whole.  So modifications to @b
are likely to be reflected back into @a.  (But maybe the PDLers will
prefer a different notation for that.)

The dimensionality of an array may be declared on the variable, but
the actual dimensionality of the array depends on how it was created.
Reconciling these views is a job for the particular array implementation.
It's not necessarily the case that the declared dimensionality must match
the actual dimensionality.  It's quite possible that the array variable
is deliberately declared with a different dimensionality to provide a
different "view" on the actual value:

    my int @array[^2;^2] is Puddle .= new(:shape(^4) <== 0,1,2,3);

Again, reconciling those ideas is up to the implementation, C<Puddle>
in this case.  The traits system is flexible enough to pass any
metadata required, including ideas about sparseness, raggedness,
and various forms of non-rectangleness such as triangleness.
The implementation should probably carp about any metadata it doesn't
recognize though.  The implementation is certainly free to reject
any object that doesn't conform to the variable's shape requirements.

=head1 Subscript and slice notation

A subscript indicates a "slice" of an array.  Each dimension
of an array is sliced separately, so we say a subscript is a
semicolon-separated list of slice specifiers, also known as a multislice.
A three-dimensional slice might look like this:

    @x[0..10; 1,0; 1..*:by(2)]

It is up to the implementation of C<@x> to decide how aggressively
or lazily this subscript is evaluated, and whether the slice entails
copying.  (The PDL folks will generally want it to merely produce a
virtual PDL where the new array aliases its values back into the
old one.)

Of course, a single element can be selected merely by providing a single
index value to each slice list:

    @x[0;1;42]

=head1 The semicolon operator

At the statement level, a semicolon terminates the current expression.
Within any kind of bracketing construct, semicolon notionally
separates slices, the interpretation of which depends on
the context.  Such a semicolon list always provides list context to
each of its sublists.  The storage of these sublists is hidden in
the inner workings of the list.  It does not produce a list of lists. 

Single dimensional arrays expect simple slice subscripts, meaning
they will treat a list subscript as a slice in the single dimension of
the array.  Multi-dimensional arrays, on the other hand, know how to
handle multiple slices, one for each dimension.  You need not specify
all the dimensions; if you don't, the unspecified dimensions are
"wildcarded".  Supposing you have:

    my num @nums[^3;^3;^3];

Then

    @nums[0..2]

is the same as

    @nums[0..2;]

which is the same as

    @nums[0,1,2;*;*]

But you should maybe write the last form anyway just for good
documentation, unless you don't actually know how many more dimensions
there are.  For that case you may use C<**>:

    @nums[0,1,2;**]

If you wanted that C<0..2> range to mean

    @nums[0;1;2]

instead, then you need to use the C<[;]> reduction operator:

    @nums[[;] 0..2]

The zero-dimensional slice:

    @x[]

is assumed to want everything, not nothing.  It's particularly handy
because Perl 6 (unlike Perl 5) won't interpolate a bare array without brackets:

    @x = (1,2,3);
    say "@x = @x[]";    # prints @x = 1 2 3

Lists are lazy in Perl 6, and the slice lists are no exception.
In particular, things like range objects are not flattened until they
need to be, if ever.  So a PDL implementation is free to steal the
values from these ranges and "piddle" around with them:

    @nums[$min..$max:by(3)]
    @nums[$min..$max]
    @nums[$min..*:by(3)]
    @nums[1..*:by(2)]           # the odds
    @nums[0..*:by(2)]           # the evens

That's all just the standard Perl 6 notation for ranges.  Additional
syntactic relief is always available as long as it's predeclared
somehow.  It's possible the range operator could be taught that C<:2>
means C<:by(2)>, for instance.  (But I rather dislike the RFC-proposed
C<0:10:2> notation that makes colon mean two different things so close
together, plus it conflicts with Perl 6's general adverb notation if
the next thing is alphabetic.  On top of which, we're using C<:2> as
a general radix notation.)

Another thing that's not going to fly easily is simply dropping out
terms.  Perl depends rather heavily on knowing when it's expecting
a term or an operator, and simply leaving out terms before or after
a binary operator really screws that up.  For instance,

    0..:by(2)

parses as

    0 .. (by => 2)

rather than

    0 .. Inf :by(2)

That's why we have C<..*> to mean C<..Inf>.

=head1 PDL signatures

To rewrite a Perl 5 PDL definition like this:

       pp_def(
            'inner',
            Pars => 'a(n); b(n); [o]c(); ', # the signature, see above
            Code => 'double tmp = 0;
                     loop(n) %{ tmp += $a() * $b(); %}
                     $c() = tmp;' );

you might want to write a macro that parses something vaguely
resembling this:

    role PDL_stuff[::TYPE] {
        PDLsub inner (@a[$n], @b[$n] --> @c[]) {
            my TYPE $tmp = 0;
            for ^$n {
                $tmp += @a[$_] * @b[$_];
            }
            @c[] = tmp;
        }
    }

where that turns into something like this:

    role PDL_stuff[::TYPE] {
        multi inner (TYPE @a, TYPE @b --> TYPE) {
            my $n = @a.shape[0];        # or maybe $n is just a parameter
            assert($n == @b.shape[0]);  #  and this is already checked by PDL
            my TYPE $tmp = 0;
            for ^$n {
                $tmp += @a[$_] * @b[$_];
            }
            return $tmp;
        }
    }

Then any class that C<does PDL_stuff[num]> has an C<inner()> function that
can (hopefully) be compiled down to a form useful to the PDL threading
engine.  Presumably the macro also stores away the PDL signature
somewhere safe, since the translated code hides that information
down in procedural code.  Possibly some of the C<[n]> information can
come back into the signature via C<where> constraints on the types.
This would presumably make multimethod dispatch possible on similarly
typed arrays with differing constraints.

(The special destruction problems of Perl 5's PDL should go away with
Perl 6's GC approach, as long as PDL's objects are registered with Parrot
correctly.)

=head1 Junctions

A junction is a superposition of data values pretending to be a single
data value.  Junctions come in four varieties:

    list op     infix op
    =======     ========
    any()       |
    all()       &
    one()       ^
    none()      (no "nor" op defined)

Note that the infix ops are "list-associative", insofar as

    $a | $b | $c
    $a & $b & $c
    $a ^ $b ^ $c

mean

    any($a,$b,$c)
    all($a,$b,$c)
    one($a,$b,$c)

rather than

    any(any($a,$b),$c)
    all(all($a,$b),$c)
    one(one($a,$b),$c)

Some contexts, such as boolean contexts, have special rules for dealing
with junctions.  In any scalar context not expecting a junction of
values, a junction produces automatic parallelization of the algorithm.
In particular, if a junction is used as an argument to any routine
(operator, closure, method, etc.), and the scalar parameter you
are attempting to bind the argument to is inconsistent with the
Junction type, that routine is "autothreaded", meaning the routine
will be called automatically as many times as necessary to process
the individual scalar elements of the junction in parallel.

The results of these separate calls are then recombined into a
single junction of the same species as the junctive argument.
If two or more arguments are junctive, then the argument that is
chosen to be "autothreaded" is:

=over

=item *

the left-most I<all> or I<none> junction (if any), or else

=item *

the left-most I<one> or I<any> junction

=back

with the tests applied in that order.

Each of the resulting set of calls is then recursively autothreaded
until no more junctive arguments remain. That is:

       substr("camel", 0|1, 2&3)

    -> all( substr("camel", 0|1, 2),      # autothread the conjunctive arg
            substr("camel", 0|1, 3)
          )

    -> all( any( substr("camel", 0, 2),   # autothread the disjunctive arg
                 substr("camel", 1, 2),
               ),
            any( substr("camel", 0, 3),   # autothread the disjunctive arg
                 substr("camel", 1, 3),
               )
          )

    -> all( any( "ca",                    # evaluate
                 "am",
               ),
            any( "cam",
                 "ame",
               )

    -> ("ca"|"am") & ("cam"|"ame")        # recombine results in junctions

Junctions passed as part of a container do not cause autothreading
unless individually pulled out and used as a scalar.  It follows that
junctions passed as members of a "slurpy" array or hash do not cause
autothreading on that parameter.  Only individually declared parameters
may autothread.  (Note that positional array and hash parameters are
in fact scalar parameters, though, so you could pass a junction of
array or hash objects.)

=head1 Parallelized parameters and autothreading

Within the scope of a C<use autoindex> pragma (or equivalent, such as
C<use PDL> (maybe)), any closure that uses parameters as subscripts
is also a candidate for autothreading.  For each such parameter, the
compiler supplies a default value that is a range of all possible
values that subscript can take on (where "possible" is taken to
mean the declared shape of a shaped array, or the actual shape of an
autoextending array).  That is, if you have a closure of the form:

    -> $x, $y { @foo[$x;$y] }

then the compiler adds defaults for you, something like:

    -> $x = @foo.shape[0].range,
       $y = @foo.shape[1].range { @foo[$x;$y] }

where each such range is autoiterated for you.

In the abstract (and often in the concrete), this puts an implicit
loop around the block of the closure that visits all the possible
subscript values for that dimension (unless the parameter is actually
supplied to the closure, in which case that is what is used as the
slice subscript).  This implicit loop is assumed to be parallelizable.

So to write a typical tensor multiplication:

    Cijkl = Aij * Bkl

you can just write this:

    use autoindex;
    do { @c[$^i, $^j, $^k, $^l] = @a[$^i, $^j] * @b[$^k, $^l] };

or equivalently:

    -> $i, $j, $k, $l { @c[$i, $j, $k, $l] = @a[$i, $j] * @b[$k, $l] }();

or even:

    do -> $i, $j, $k, $l {
        @c[$i, $j, $k, $l] = @a[$i, $j] * @b[$k, $l]
    }

That's almost pretty.

It is erroneous for an unbound parameter to match multiple existing array
subscripts differently.  (Arrays being created don't count.)

Note that you could pass any of $i, $j, $k or $l explicitly, or prebind
them with a C<.assuming> method, in which only the unbound parameters
autothread.

If you use an unbound array parameter as a semicolon-list interpolator
(via the C<[;]> reduction operator), it functions as a wildcard list of
subscripts that must match the same everywhere that parameter is used.
For example,

    do -> @wild { @b[[;] reverse @wild] = @a[[;] @wild]; };

produces an array with the dimensions reversed regardless of the
dimensionality of C<@a>.  Since the multidimensional C<@@wild> notation
is more or less equivalent to C<[;]@wild>, you can also write that as:

    do -> @@wild { @b[reverse @@wild] = @a[[;] @@wild]; };

The optimizer is, of course, free to optimize away any implicit loops
that it can figure out how to do more efficiently without changing
the semantics.

See RFC 207 for more ideas on how to use autothreading (though the syntax
proposed there is rather different).

=head1 Hashes

Everything we've said for arrays applies to hashes as well, except that
if you're going to limit the keys of one dimension of a hash, you have
to provide an explicit list of keys to that dimension of the shape,
or an equivalent range:

    my num %hash{<a b c d e f>; Str};
    my num %hash{'a'..'f'; Str};                # same thing

To declare a hash that can take any object as a key rather than
just a string, say something like:

    my %hash{Any};
    my %hash{*};

A hash of indeterminate dimensionality is:

    my %hash{**};

As with arrays, you can limit the keys to objects of particular types:

    my Fight %hash{Dog; Cat where {!.scared}};

The standard Hash is just

    my Any %hash{Str};

Note that any type used as a key must be intrinsically immutable,
or it has to be able to make a copy that functions as an immutable key,
or it has to have copy-on-write semantics.  It is erroneous to change
a key object's value within the hash except by deleting it and reinserting
it.

=head1 Autosorted hashes

The default hash iterator is a property called C<.iterator> that can be
user replaced.  When the hash itself needs an iterator for C<.pairs>,
C<.keys>, C<.values>, or C<.kv>, it calls C<%hash.iterator()> to
start one.  In scalar context, C<.iterator> returns an iterator object.
In list context, it returns a lazy list fed by the iterator.  It must
be possible for a hash to be in more than one iterator at a time,
as long as the iterator state is stored in a lazy list.
However, there is only one implicit iterator (the C<each> iterator)
that works in scalar context to return the next pair.  [Or maybe not.]

The downside to making a hash autosort via the iterator is that you'd
have to store all the keys in sorted order, and resort it when the
hash changes.  Alternately, the entire hash could be tied to an ISAM
implementation (not included (XXX or should it be?)).

For multidimensional hashes, the key returned by any hash iterator is
a list of keys, the size of which is the number of declared dimensions
of the hash.  [XXX but this seems to imply another lookup to find the
value.  Perhaps the associated value can also be bundled in somehow.]

=head1 Autovivification

Autovivification will only happen if the vivifiable path is used as a
container, by binding, assigning, or capturing into an argument list.
On the other hand, value extraction does not autovivify.

This is as opposed to Perl 5, where autovivification could happen
unintentionally, even when the code looks like a non-destructive test:

    # This is Perl 5 code
    my %hash;
    exists $hash{foo}{bar}; # creates $hash{foo} as an empty hash reference

In Perl 6 these read-only operations are indeed non-destructive:

    my %hash;
    exists %hash<foo><bar>; # %hash is still empty

But these ones I<do> autovivify:

    my %hash;
    my $val := %hash<foo><bar>;

    my @array;
    my $obj = \@array[0][0]; # $obj is a Capture object - see S02

    my %hash;
    %hash<foo><bar> = "foo"; # duh

This rule applies to C<Array>, C<Hash>, and C<Scalar> container objects.

=head1 Negative subscript dwimmery

It has become the custom to use negative subscripts to indicate counting
from the end of an array.  This is still supported, but only for unshaped
arrays:

    my @a1 = 1,2,3;
    my @a2[*] = 1,2,3;
    @a1[-1]       # 3
    @a1[-0.5]     # also 3 (uses floor semantics)
    @a2[-1]       # ERROR
    @a2[-0.0001]  # ERROR
    @a2[0.0001]   # 1

For shaped arrays you must explicitly refer to the current endpoint
using C<*>, the C<Whatever> object:

    @a2[*-1]      # 3
    @a2[+*] = 1   # same as push(@a2, 1)

When you use C<*> with C<+> and C<->, it creates a value of C<Whatever>
but C<Num>, which the array subscript interpreter will interpret as the
subscript one off the end of that dimension of the array.  The lower
right corner of a two dimensional array is C<@array[*-1; *-1]>.

This policy has the fortuitous outcome that arrays declared with negative
subscripts will never interpret negative subscripts as relative to the end:

    my @array[-5..5];
    @array[-1];         # always the 4th element, not the 11th.
    @array[*-1];        # always the 11th element, not the 4th.

Oddly, this gives us a canonical way to get the last element, but no
canonical way to get the first element, unless

    @array[*-*];

works...

Alternately, C<*+0> is the first element, and the subscript dwims
from the front or back depending on the sign.  That would be more
symmetrical, but makes the idea of C<*> in a subscript a little more
distant from the notion of "all the keys", which would be a loss,
and potentially makes C<+*> not mean the number of keys.

Conjecture: we might provide a way to declare a modular subscript that
emulates the dwimmery, perhaps by using a subset type:

    subset Mod10 of Int where ^10;
    my @array[Mod5];
    @array[42] = 1;     # sets @array[2]
    @array[582];        # returns 1

But perhaps C<Mod10> should work just like C<^10>, and the modular behavior
requires some extra syntax.

=for vim:set expandtab sw=4:
