=head1 Different Names of Different Things

Newcomers to the Perl programming language, version 5, often complain that
they can't reverse strings. There's a built-in 
L<reverse|http://perldoc.perl.org/functions/reverse.html> function, but it
doesn't seem to work at first glance:

    $ perl -E "say reverse 'hello'"
    hello

When such programmers L<ask more experienced Perl programmers|http://strangelyconsistent.org/blog/the-taming-of-the-newbie-a-comedy-on-irc>,
the solution is quickly found: C<reverse> has actually two different operation
modes. In list context it reverses lists, in scalar context it reverses
strings.

    $ perl -E "say scalar reverse 'hello'"
    olleh

Sadly this an exception from Perl's usual context model. For most operators
or functions the operator determines the context, and the data is interpreted
in that context. For example C<+> and C<*> work on numbers, and C<.> works on
strings (concatenation). So a symbol (or function name, in the case of
L<uc|http://perldoc.perl.org/function/uc.html>) stands for an operation, and
provides context. Not so C<reverse>.

In Perl 6, we try to learn from previous mistakes, and get rid of historical
inconsistencies. This is why list reversal, string reversal and hash inversion
have been split up into separate built-ins:

    # string reversal, sorry, flipping:
    $ perl6 -e 'say flip "hello"'
    olleh

    # reversing lists
    # perl6 -e 'say join ", ", reverse <ab cd ef>'
    ef, cd, ab

    # hash inversion
    perl6 -e 'my %capitals = France => "Paris", UK => "London";
              say %capitals.invert.perl'
    ("Paris" => "France", "London" => "UK")

Hash inversion differs from the other two operations in that the result is of
a different type than the input. Since hash values need not be unique,
inverting a hash and returning the result as a hash would either change the
structure (by grouping the keys of non-unique values together somehow), or lose
information (by having one value override the other ones).

Instead hash inversion returns a list of pairs, and the user can decide which
mode of operation they want for turning the result back into a hash, if that's
necessary at all.

Here's how you do it if you want the hash inversion operation to be
non-destructive:

    my %inverse;
    %inverse.push( %original.invert );

As pairs with already-seen keys get pushed onto the C<%inverse> hash, the
original value isn't overriden but instead "promoted" to an array. Here's
a small demonstration:

    my %h;
    %h.push('foo' => 1);    # foo => 1
    %h.push('foo' => 2);    # foo => [1, 2]
    %h.push('foo' => 3);    # foo => [1, 2, 3]

All three (flip/reverse/invert) coerce their arguments to the expected type
(if possible).  For example if you pass a list to C<flip>, it is coerced into
a string and then the string is rever^W flipped.
