=head1 The Perl 6 module ecosystem

The Perl 6 module database on L<http://modules.perl6.org> is certainly
not CPAN yet, but there are still a number of things worth using, or
at least knowing about. There's no "standard" module installer for
Perl 6, like there's a cpan shell for Perl 5, but the most commonly used
and most often working is L<neutro|https://github.com/tadzik/neutro>.
It's a simple script fetching, building, and installing modules from
L<the ecosystem|https://github.com/perl6/ecosystem>, resolving
dependencies and checking if the tests are passing: not much more we
need. Let's see how to install something interesting with it, say
L<JSON::Tiny|https://github.com/moritz/json/>, a JSON parser.

First, we need to get neutro. We will assume you use git to obtain it;
notice that git is also obligatory to download modules (all of them
live on github currently).

    git clone git://github.com/tadzik/neutro.git
    cd neutro
    PERL6LIB=tmplib bin/neutro .

That will download neutro and bootstrap it using the supplied libs.
What we end up is the module installer itself, and the File::Tools and
Module::Tools distributions. From now on, assuming C<~/.perl6/bin> is in
your PATH (check your C<~/.profile> or C<~/.bashrc> to be sure), you
will be able to install modules as simply as with cpanminus:
    
    neutro json
    neutro perl6-Term-ANSIColor
    neutro perl6-lwp-simple

You may notice module names are not similar to what you may be used to
from Perl 5. They're not standarized, they're just the names of a git
repos they live in. To make sure what you are looking for, consult the
list:
    
    neutro update # fetch the fresh list of modules
    neutro list

Modules will be installed to C<~/.perl6/lib>, which is in the default
search path of Rakudo, so you don't really need to set PERL6LIB yourself:

    perl6 -e 'use Term::ANSIColor; say colored("Hello blue world!", "blue")'

and C<~/.perl6/lib> is in your PERL6LIB You probably just can't wait to write your first module and make it
available for the whole world. There's no CPAN where you can send your
packages; the usual workflow is creating a repository on L<Github|http://github.com> and adding it to the L<projects.list|https://github.com/perl6/ecosystem/blob/master/projects.list>
file in the L<ecosystem|https://github.com/perl6/ecosystem>. You don't
need to have a direct access to the repo to get your module published.
You can either send a pull request for your forked ecosystem repo,
send a patch, or just ask some of the commiters or people on the #perl6
channel of Freenode.

How to write a module, what tools to use? If you're interested, look
into the L<guide|http://ttjjss.wordpress.com/2010/08/09/so-you-want-to-write-a-perl-6-module/>.

Happy hacking!
