=head1 Reaching the Stars

Coming from the Perl 5 world, or from some other background, you may
think of the programming language and its implementation as the one
thing, or at least things very strongly tied to each other. Perl 6 is
different. The „official” part is the specification (the Synopses) and
the tests suite. Perl 6 encourages multiple implementations. Any
implementation passing the official test suite and fullfiling the
Synopses may call itself „a Perl 6 implementation”. While there is still 
no such implementation, there is alredy a few compilers in the ecosystem.
Rakudo is targetting the Parrot virtual machine, and it's the most
complete implementation so far. Niecza is targetting .NET and is aiming
to study performance issues. There is also Yapsi, whose „author has
claimed that it's official for over half a year now, and not once been
contradicted” :) We will be using Rakudo for our examples as it is the
most complete implementation around and has the largest ecosystem built
around it.

Like with Perl 6, there is no „one Rakudo to rule them all”. The Rakudo
development team has decided to keep the compiler separate from the
distribution. That means the Rakudo release is not a ready to use Perl 6
tarball, with modules, documentation and a virtual machine. That's what
Rakudo Star is. First released about half a year ago, Rakudo Star
contains the toolbox with everything needed for Perl 6 hacking: a
release of Parrot virtual machine, the Perl 6 Book, a bunch of modules
and the Rakudo itself.

=head2 Getting Rakudo Star

The Rakudo Star tarballs are located at
L<https://github.com/rakudo/star/downloads>. Go get one suitable for
your system and become ready for Christmas... again!
