=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Rosetta::Migration -
Assist translating between various languages

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The native command language of a L<Rosetta> DBMS / virtual machine is
called B<Rosetta D>.  Both that language, and the details of the Rosetta
virtual machine's environment in which it executes, are described fully in
the L<Rosetta::Language> documentation file that comes with this "Rosetta"
distribution.  The L<Rosetta> core file defines the programmatic API for
applications to use these virtual machines.

This document, Rosetta::Migration ("Migration"), is intended to help users
of Rosetta to map the concepts and syntax of their existing database access
tools, database schemas, and database queries, between Rosetta's native
language and their current forms, such as SQL:2003 and other SQL dialects,
and the "Tutorial D" relational data language, and various general purpose
programming languages like C and Perl.

This document should be helpful when converting applications to use Rosetta
to define their relational database concerning structures and tasks.  This
document should also be helpful when creating a Rosetta-based API layer on
top of an existing database manager, so you know how to go about
translating input and output to and from that database manager, or when
creating something like a SQL translating tool.

=head1 SEE ALSO

Go to L<Rosetta> for the majority of distribution-internal references, and
L<Rosetta::SeeAlso> for the majority of distribution-external references.

=head1 AUTHOR

Darren R. Duncan (C<perl@DarrenDuncan.net>)

=head1 LICENCE AND COPYRIGHT

This file is part of the Rosetta DBMS framework.

Rosetta is Copyright (c) 2002-2006, Darren R. Duncan.

See the LICENCE AND COPYRIGHT of L<Rosetta> for details.

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS in L<Rosetta> apply to this file too.

=cut
