=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Rosetta::SeeAlso -
External resources that you really ought to look at

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document is a central location within the L<Rosetta> distribution
where any important recommendations of or links to external resources go.
This includes both resources that helped me when I made Rosetta, as well as
Resources that are or could be related to Rosetta.

=head1 INFORMATION SOURCES

During my work on this project, I found the following resources to be
particularly useful:

=over

=item B<The Third Manifesto>

L<http://www.thethirdmanifesto.com/> is the main home on the web for
Christopher J. Date's and Hugh Darwen's proposal for a foundation for data
and database management systems, which Rosetta is officially an
implementation of.  It contains various useful documents and links on the
subject, especially
L<http://web.onetel.com/~hughdarwen/TheThirdManifesto/CHAP03.pdf>.  See
also the brand new release of their book containing the full proposal,
"Databases, Types, and The Relational Model: The Third Manifesto, 3rd
edition, Addison-Wesley, 2006 (ISBN: 0-321-44281-4)", at
L<http://www.aw-bc.com/catalog/academic/product/0,1144,0321399420,00.html>.

=item B<Database in Depth>

See Christopher J. Date's "Database in Depth: Relational Theory for
Practitioners, 1st edition, Oreilly, 2006 (ISBN: 0-596-10012-4)" at
L<http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/databaseid/>.  This is the first printed
book that I read fully, which is related to The Third Manifesto, and it was
my main introduction.  It explains in an easy to follow matter just what
the relational data model really is, a solid and provable logical system,
and partially contrasts with SQL's distorted view of it.  While being easy
to follow, the book is written towards people that are already database
professionals, and doesn't go into the basics that we should already know.

=item L<http://www.acm.org/classics/nov95/toc.html>

Edgar F. Codd - "A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks"

Reprinted from I<Communications of the ACM>, Vol. 13, No. 6, June 1970, pp.
377-387. Copyright © 1970, Association for Computing Machinery, Inc.

This is the second famous 1969/1970 publication that first presented a
relational model of data to the world, which is the basis for the modern
database industry.

=item L<http://www.wiscorp.com/SQLStandards.html>

This web page of Whitemarsh Information Systems Corporation, run by one of
the people on the SQL standard drafting community, has copies of the
official SQL:2003 and SQL:1999 specification documents, and other related
helpful documents about SQL, in PDF format.  For example, "an almost
indistinguishable delta on the actual SQL 2003 database standard" is at
L<http://www.wiscorp.com/sql/sql_2003_standard.zip> (warning, large file).

=item L<http://www.unicode.org/standard/standard.html>

Unicode Standard official documentation.

=item L<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relational_model>

The Wikipedia article on the relational data model, and related topics.

=back

Also, the vendor documentation for various relational and/or SQL databases
such as MySQL and SQLite were regularly consulted, and various other sites.

=head1 SOME TTM/D-RELATED DBMS PROJECTS

Besides the Rosetta DBMS framework, other projects exist which
attempt to implement The Third Manifesto or approximations of it.

=head2 Free and Open Source Software

These software projects are released under a free and open source license,
as Rosetta is, so you have the freedom to examine the project source code,
change it, and redistribute it:

=over

=item B<Rel> - L<http://dbappbuilder.sourceforge.net/Rel.html>

Rel is a relational database server, written by Dave Voorhis
(d.voorhis@derby.ac.uk), that implements Date and Darwen's "Tutorial D"
language mainly "by the book".  It is written in Java (version 1.5) and is
operating-system independent.  It is licensed under the GNU GPL.

=item B<Duro> - L<http://duro.sourceforge.net/>

Duro is a relational database library, written by René Hartmann
(rhartmann@users.sourceforge.net).  It is written in C (with a Tcl
interface), is implemented on top of the Berkeley DB database library, and
runs on all POSIX/Unix-like and 32-bit Windows operating systems.  It is
licensed under the GNU GPL.

=back

=head2 Closed Source Software

These software projects are released without access to the project source
code or permission to change them, though some are available at zero cost:

=over

=item B<Dataphor> - L<http://www.alphora.com/>

Dataphor is a TTM-inspired commercial database application development tool
set, owned by Alphora (a division of Softwise, Inc.), that implements its
own "D4" language.  It is written to the .Net platform and only runs on
Windows.  It is implemented using a federated server that employs various
other database engines for storage.

=item B<Opus> - L<http://ca.geocities.com/dcauz@rogers.com/opus/>

Opus is a command-line relational database development system, written by
David Cauz (dcauz@rogers.com) and Paul Church, that implements its own
"Opus" language (that has the syntactic style of C).  It is written in C
and only runs on Windows.

=back

=head2 Academic Design Projects

These project designs were made for academic purposes and don't include
implementations:

=over

=item B<Db ("D flat")> -
L<http://web.onetel.com/~hughdarwen/TheThirdManifesto/REAL.pdf>

This is a final year project by UMIST student Peter Nicol.

=back

=head1 SOME SQL-BASED DBMS PROJECTS

Many DBMS exist which implement a variant of the SQL language as their main
or only interface; a relative few are listed here.

=head2 Free and Open Source Software

=over

=item B<Genezzo> - L<http://www.genezzo.com/>

Genezzo is a micro kernel style enterprise-strength SQL database server,
written mainly by Jeffrey Cohen (jcohen@cpan.org), currently under
construction.  It is written in a hybrid of C and Perl 5, and runs on any
operating system.  It is licensed under the GNU GPL.

I<Note: Genezzo sans its SQL interface is currently a front-line candidate
for implementing a production / industrial quality Rosetta Engine.>

=item B<SQLite> - L<http://www.sqlite.org/>

SQLite is a small library that implements a fully transactional file-based
SQL database engine, written mainly by D. Richard Hipp (Hwaci - Applied
Software Research).  It is written in C (with creator-bundled Tcl bindings)
and runs on any operating system, being particularly suited for embedded
devices.  It is committed to the public domain and can be used in any other
license of program.  Bindings for many programming languages exist,
including for Perl 5.

=item B<PostgreSQL> - L<http://www.postgresql.org/>

PostgreSQL is a powerful SQL database server, owned by the PostgreSQL
Global Development Group.  It is written in C and runs on any operating
system.  It is licensed under a BSD-like license, specifically the license
of the University of California.  Bindings for many programming languages
exist, including for Perl 5.

=item B<MySQL> - L<http://www.mysql.com/>

MySQL is a multi-engine SQL database server, owned by MySQL AB.  It is
written in C and runs on any operating system.  It is dual-licensed under
the GNU GPL (at no cost) and under a proprietary license (for a fee).
Bindings for many programming languages exist, including for Perl 5.

=item B<Firebird> - L<http://www.firebirdsql.org/>

Firebird is a mature SQL database server, forked from the open sources of
InterBase by Inprise/Borland; portions are owned by Inprise/Borland and
members of the Firbird Foundation.  It is written in C++ (newer version)
and runs on any operating system.  Portions are licensed under various
Mozilla-Public-like licenses, specifically the Interbase Public License and
the Initial Developer's Public License.  Bindings for many programming
languages exist, including for Perl 5.

=back

=head2 Closed Source Software

=over

=item B<Oracle> - L<http://www.oracle.com/database/>

=item B<Sybase> - L<http://www.sybase.com/>

=item B<SQL Server> - L<http://www.microsoft.com/sql/>

=item B<Informix> - L<http://www.ibm.com/software/data/informix/>

=item B<DB2> - L<http://www.ibm.com/software/data/db2/>

=item B<OpenBase> - L<http://www.openbase.com/>

=item B<FrontBase> - L<http://www.frontbase.com/>

=back

=head1 SOME OTHER DBMS PROJECTS

Many DBMS exist that are neither TTM/D-based nor primarily SQL based; a
relative few are listed here.

=head2 Free and Open Source Software

=over

=item B<Berkeley DB> - L<http://www.sleepycat.com/>

=back

=head2 Closed Source Software

=over

=item B<FileMaker Pro> - L<http://www.filemaker.com/>

=back

=head1 LIST OF PUBLIC ROSETTA ENGINES

I<This documentation is pending.>

L<Rosetta::Engine::Example>.

=head1 PUBLIC SOLUTIONS BUILT OVER ROSETTA

I<This documentation is pending.>

These Perl 5 applications and frameworks are at the front of the line to
get Rosetta bindings: L<Catalyst>, L<Maypole>, L<Bricolage>, L<RT>.

=head1 DBMS-RELATED PERL MODULES

I<This documentation is pending.>

These Perl 5 packages work to solve similar problems as Rosetta:
L<DBI>, L<Tangram>, L<DBIx::Class>, L<HDB>, L<Genezzo>, L<Class::DBI>,
L<Pixie>, L<Alzabo>, L<DBIx::SQLEngine>, L<SPOPS>, L<DBIx::SearchBuilder>,
L<DBIx::RecordSet>, L<DBIx::Abstract>, L<DBIx::AnyDBD>, L<DBIx::Browse>,
L<DBIx::DBH>, L<MKDoc::SQL>, L<Data::Transactional>, L<DBIx::ModelUpdate>,
L<DBIx::ProcedureCall>, L<DB::Ent>, L<DBIx::DBSchema>, L<DBIx::Namespace>,
L<TripleStore>, L<Data::Table>, L<ORM>, L<OOPS>.

These Perl 5 packages work to solve similar problems as Rosetta::Model:
L<SQL::Statement>, L<SQL::Parser>, L<SQL::Translator>, L<SQL::YASP>,
L<SQL::Generator>, L<SQL::Schema>, L<SQL::Abstract>, L<SQL::Snippet>,
L<SQL::Catalog>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Darren R. Duncan (C<perl@DarrenDuncan.net>)

=head1 LICENCE AND COPYRIGHT

This file is part of the Rosetta DBMS framework.

Rosetta is Copyright (c) 2002-2006, Darren R. Duncan.

See the LICENCE AND COPYRIGHT of L<Rosetta> for details.

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS in L<Rosetta> apply to this file too.

=cut
