=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

SQL::Routine::Migration -
Assist translating between various languages

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SQL::Routine provides an effective language for defining relational data
models, both the means to create them and the means to interact with them;
see the documentation of L<SQL::Routine> itself (in the current
distribution) for a further introduction.

This document, SQL::Routine::Migration ("Migration"), is intended to help
users of SQL::Routine to map the concepts and syntax of their existing
database schemas and access specifications, between SQL::Routine's native
language and their current forms, such as SQL:2003 and other SQL dialects,
and the "Tutorial D" relational data language, and various general purpose
programming languages like C and Perl.

This document should be helpful when converting applications to use
SQL::Routine to define their relational database concerning structures and
tasks.  This document should also be helpful when creating a
SQL::Routine-based API layer on top of an existing database manager, so you
know how to go about translating input and output to and from that database
manager, or when creating something like a SQL translating tool.

=head1 SEE ALSO

I<This documentation is pending.>

=head1 AUTHOR

Darren R. Duncan (C<perl@DarrenDuncan.net>)

=head1 LICENCE AND COPYRIGHT

This file is part of the SQL::Routine database portability library.

SQL::Routine is Copyright (c) 2002-2006, Darren R. Duncan.

See the LICENCE AND COPYRIGHT of L<SQL::Routine> for details.

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS in L<SQL::Routine> apply to this file too.

=cut
